www.transcendwithwords.com

Coronavirus Disease: English-Russian Medical Dictionary

Коронавирусная инфекция: англо-русский толковый медицинский словарь
Official Name of the Disease:1
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) / коронавирусная инфекция (COVID-19)
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) / коронавирус тяжелого острого респираторного синдрома-2 (SARS-CoV-2)

Based on: Coronavirus: A Medical Dictionary, Bibliography, and Annotated Research Guide to Internet References. James N. Parker
and Philip M. Parker, editors, 2004.
The definitions below are derived from official public sources, including the National Institutes of Health and the European Union.

Abdominal

Брюшной, абдоминальный

Having to do with the abdomen, which is the part of the body
between the chest and the hips that contains the pancreas,
stomach, intestines, liver, gallbladder, and other organs.

Abdominal pain

Боли в области живота,
боли в животе

Sensation of discomfort, distress, or agony in the abdominal
region.

Acetylcholine

Ацетилхолин,
ацетилхолиновый

A neurotransmitter. Acetylcholine in vertebrates is the major
transmitter at neuromuscular junctions, autonomic ganglia,
parasympathetic effector junctions, a subset of sympathetic
effector junctions, and at many sites in the central nervous
system. It is generally not used as an administered drug
because it is broken down very rapidly by cholinesterases, but
it is useful in some ophthalmological applications.

Adaptability

Адаптируемость,
приспособляемость

Ability to develop some form of tolerance to conditions
extremely different from those under which a living organism
evolved.

Adenovirus

Аденовирус

A group of viruses that cause respiratory tract and eye
infections. Adenoviruses used in gene therapy are altered to
carry a specific tumor-fighting gene.

Adjuvant

Адъювант (адъювантный),
вспомогательное вещество

A substance which aids another, such as an auxiliary remedy;
in immunology, nonspecific stimulator (e.g., BCG vaccine) of
the immune response.

Adoptive transfer

Адоптивный перенос

Form of passive immunization where previously sensitized
immunologic agents (cells or serum) are transferred to nonimmune recipients. When transfer of cells is used as a therapy
for the treatment of neoplasms, it is called adoptive
immunotherapy (immunotherapy, adoptive).

Adrenal cortex

Кора надпочечников

The outer layer of the adrenal gland. It secretes
mineralocorticoids, androgens, and glucocorticoids.

Adverse effect

Неблагоприятное/
нежелательное
воздействие, побочный
эффект

An unwanted side effect of treatment.

1 WHO's COVID-19 Technical Guidance Documents (Коронавирусное заболевание (COVID-19) - Технические доклады и рекомендации):
https://www.who.int/ru/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/naming-the-coronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-andthe-virus-that-causes-it.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Affinity

1–2. Сходство, подобие;
Сродство; 3-4 Сродство,
аффинность (аффинный),
взаимодействие между
антигеном и антителом,
система «антиген —
антитело»

1. A special attraction for a specific element, organ, or
structure. 2. Chemical affinity; the force that binds atoms in
molecules; the tendency of substances to combine by chemical
reaction. 3. The strength of noncovalent chemical binding
between two substances as measured by the dissociation
constant of the complex. 4. In immunology, a thermodynamic
expression of the strength of interaction between a single
antigen-binding site and a single antigenic determinant (and
thus of the stereochemical compatibility between them), most
accurately applied to interactions among simple, uniform
antigenic determinants such as haptens. Expressed as the
association constant (K liters mole -1), which, owing to the
heterogeneity of affinities in a population of antibody
molecules of a given specificity, actually represents an average
value (mean intrinsic association constant.

Agar

Агар (агаровый)

A complex sulfated polymer of galactose units, extracted from
Gelidium cartilagineum, Gracilaria confervoides, and related
red algae. It is used as a gel in the preparation of solid culture
media for microorganisms, as a bulk laxative, in making
emulsions, and as a supporting medium for immunodiffusion
and immunoelectrophoresis.

Agarose

Агароза

A polysaccharide complex, free of nitrogen and prepared from
agar-agar which is produced by certain seaweeds (red algae).
It dissolves in warm water to form a viscid solution.

Age groups

Возрастные группы

Persons classified by age from birth (infant, new-born) to
octogenarians and older (aged, 80 and over).

Aged 80 and over

В возрасте 80 лет и старше

A person 80 years of age and older.

Airway

Воздуховод

A device for securing unobstructed passage of air into and out
of the lungs during general anesthesia.

Algorithms

Алгоритмы

A procedure consisting of a sequence of algebraic formulas
and/or logical steps to calculate or determine a given task.

Alimentary

Алиментарный, пищевой;
пищеварительный;
питательный

Pertaining to food or nutritive material, or to the organs of
digestion.

Alkaline

Щелочной

Having the reactions of an alkali.

Alternative medicine

Нетрадиционная медицина

Practices not generally recognized by the medical community
as standard or conventional medical approaches and used
instead of standard treatments. Alternative medicine includes
the taking of dietary supplements, megadose vitamins, and
herbal preparations; the drinking of special teas; and practices
such as massage therapy, magnet therapy, spiritual healing,
and meditation.

Amino acid motifs

Аминокислотные мотивы

Commonly observed structural components of proteins
formed by simple combinations of adjacent secondary
structures. A commonly observed structure may be composed
of a conserved sequence which can be represented by a
consensus sequence.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Amino acid sequence

Аминокислотная
последовательность

The order of amino acids as they occur in a polypeptide chain.
This is referred to as the primary structure of proteins. It is of
fundamental
importance
in
determining
protein
conformation.

Amino acids

Аминокислоты

Organic compounds that generally contain an amino (–H2)
and a carboxyl (–COOH) group. Twenty alpha-amino acids are
the subunits which are polymerized to form proteins.

Amino-terminal

Амино-концевой,
аминотерминальный

The end of a protein or polypeptide chain that contains a free
amino group (–NH2).

Ammonia

Аммоний

A colorless alkaline gas. It is formed in the body during
decomposition of organic materials during a large number of
metabolically important reactions.

Amplification

Амплификация

The production of additional copies of a chromosomal DNA
sequence, found as either intrachromosomal or
extrachromosomal DNA.

Anesthesia

Наркоз, обезболивание,
анестезия

Loss of feeling or sensation. Although the term is used for loss
of tactile sensibility, or of any of the other senses, it is applied
especially to loss of the sensation of pain, as it is induced to
permit performance of surgery or other painful procedures.

Anal

Анальный

Having to do with the anus, which is the posterior opening of
the large bowel.

Analogous

Аналогичный

Resembling or similar in some respects, as in function or
appearance, but not in origin or development.

Anaphylatoxins

Анафилатоксин

The family of peptides C3a, C4a, C5a, and C5a des-arginine
produced in the serum during complement activation. They
produce smooth muscle contraction, mast cell histamine
release, affect platelet aggregation, and act as mediators of the
local inflammatory process. The order of anaphylatoxin
activity from strongest to weakest is C5a, C3a, C4a, and C5a
des-arginine. The latter is the so-called "classical"
anaphylatoxin but shows no spasmogenic activity though it
contains some chemotactic ability.

Anatomical

Анатомический

Pertaining to anatomy, or to the structure of the organism.

Androgens

Андрогены

A class of sex hormones associated with the development and
maintenance of the secondary male sex characteristics, sperm
induction, and sexual differentiation. In addition to increasing
virility and libido, they also increase nitrogen and water
retention and stimulate skeletal growth.

Anemia

Анемия

A reduction in the number of circulating erythrocytes or in the
quantity of hemoglobin.

Animal model

Модель исследования на
животных,
экспериментальная модель
на животном, животная
модель

An animal with a disease either the same as or like a disease in
humans. Animal models are used to study the development
and progression of diseases and to test new treatments before
they are given to humans. Animals with transplanted human
cancers or other tissues are called xenograft models.

Annealing

Отжиг

The spontaneous alignment of two single DNA strands to form
a double helix.

Anorexia

Анорексия

Lack or loss of appetite for food. Appetite is psychologic,
dependent on memory and associations. Anorexia can be

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

brought about by unattractive food, surroundings, or
company.
Antiallergic

Противоаллергический

Counteracting allergy or allergic conditions.

Antibacterial

Антибактериальныей

A substance that destroys bacteria or suppresses their growth
or reproduction.

Antibiotic

Антибиотик

A drug used to treat infections caused by bacteria and other
microorganisms.

Antibodies

Антитела

Immunoglobulin molecules having a specific amino acid
sequence by virtue of which they interact only with the
antigen that induced their synthesis in cells of the lymphoid
series (especially plasma cells), or with an antigen closely
related to it.

Antibody

Антитело

A type of protein made by certain white blood cells in response
to a foreign substance (antigen). Each antibody can bind to
only a specific antigen. The purpose of this binding is to help
destroy the antigen. Antibodies can work in several ways,
depending on the nature of the antigen. Some antibodies
destroy antigens directly. Others make it easier for white
blood cells to destroy the antigen.

Anticoagulant

Антикоагулянт

A drug that helps prevent blood clots from forming. Also
called a blood thinner.

Antigen

Антиген

Any substance which is capable, under appropriate
conditions, of inducing a specific immune response and of
reacting with the products of that response, that is, with
specific antibody or specifically sensitized T-lymphocytes, or
both. Antigens may be soluble substances, such as toxins and
foreign proteins, or particulate, such as bacteria and tissue
cells; however, only the portion of the protein or
polysaccharide molecule known as the antigenic determinant
(q.v.) combines with antibody or a specific receptor on a
lymphocyte. Abbreviated Ag.

Antigen-antibody
complex

Комплекс антиген–
антитело

The complex formed by the binding of antigen and antibody
molecules. The deposition of large antigen-antibody
complexes leading to tissue damage causes immune complex
diseases.

Antigen-presenting cell

Антигенпредставляющие
клетки

APC. A cell that shows antigen on its surface to other cells of
the immune system. This is an important part of an immune
response.

Anti-inflammatory

Противовоспалительный

Having to do with reducing inflammation.

Anti-inflammatory
agents

Противовоспалительные
средства/ препараты

Substances that reduce or suppress inflammation.

Antineoplastic

Противоопухолевые
средства/ препараты

Inhibiting or preventing the development of neoplasms,
checking the maturation and proliferation of malignant cells.

Antiviral

Противовирусный,
антивирусный

Destroying viruses or suppressing their replication.

Antiviral agents

Антивирусные средства/
препараты

Agents used in the prophylaxis or therapy of virus diseases.
Some of the ways they may act include preventing viral
replication by inhibiting viral DNA polymerase; binding to
specific cell-surface receptors and inhibiting viral penetration
or uncoating; inhibiting viral protein synthesis; or blocking
late stages of virus assembly.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Anus

Анус, задний проход,
анальное отверстие

The opening of the rectum to the outside of the body.

Apnea

Апноэ

A transient absence of spontaneous respiration.

Apolipoproteins

Аполипопротеины

The protein components of lipoproteins which remain after
the lipids to which the proteins are bound have been removed.
They play an important role in lipid transport and metabolism.

Apoptosis

Апоптоз

One of the two mechanisms by which cell death occurs (the
other being the pathological process of necrosis). Apoptosis is
the mechanism responsible for the physiological depletion of
cells and appears to be intrinsically programmed. It is
characterized by distinctive morphologic changes in the
nucleus and cytoplasm, chromatin cleavage at regularly
spaced sites, and the endonucleolytic cleavage of genomic
DNA (DNA fragmentation) at internucleosomal sites. This
mode of cell death serves as a balance to mitosis in regulating
the size of animal tissues and in mediating pathologic
processes associated with tumor growth.

Aqueous

Водный; водорастворимый

Having to do with water.

Arginine

Аргинин

An essential amino acid that is physiologically active in the Lform.

Arterial

Артериальный

Pertaining to an artery or to the arteries.

Arteritis

Артериит

Inflammation of an artery.

Arterivirus

Артеривирус

A genus that is currently unclassified, Arterivirus is likely to be
part of Coronaviridae or a new family. It was previously
classified under Togaviridae. The type species is equine
arteritis virus.

Aspirate

Пунктат

Fluid withdrawn from a lump, often a cyst, or a nipple.

Assay

Анализ

Determination of the amount of a particular constituent of a
mixture, or of the biological or pharmacological potency of a
drug.

Astrocytes

Астроциты

The largest and most numerous neuroglial cells in the brain
and spinal cord. Astrocytes (from "star" cells) are irregularly
shaped with many long processes, including those with "end
feet" which form the glial (limiting) membrane and directly
and indirectly contribute to the blood brain barrier. They
regulate the extracellular ionic and chemical environment,
and "reactive astrocytes" (along with microglia) respond to
injury. Astrocytes have high- affinity transmitter uptake
systems, voltage-dependent and transmitter-gated ion
channels, and can release transmitter, but their role in
signaling (as in many other functions) is not well understood.

Astrocytoma

Астроцитома

A tumor that begins in the brain or spinal cord in small, starshaped cells called astrocytes.

Asymptomatic

Бессимптомный

Having no signs or symptoms of disease.

Atrophy

Атрофия

Decrease in the size of a cell, tissue, organ, or multiple organs,
associated with a variety of pathological conditions such as
abnormal cellular changes, ischemia, malnutrition, or
hormonal changes.

Attenuated

Аттенуированный

Strain with weakened or reduced virulence.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Attenuation

Ослабление, аттенуация

Reduction of transmitted sound energy or its electrical
equivalent.

Atypical

Нетипичный

Irregular; not conformable to the type; in microbiology,
applied specifically to strains of unusual type.

Autoimmune disease

Аутоиммунное заболевание

A condition in which the body recognizes its own tissues as
foreign and directs an immune response against them.

Autologous

Аутологичный

Taken from an individual's own tissues, cells, or DNA.

Autologous bone
marrow
transplantation

Аутологичная
трансплантация костного
мозга

A procedure in which bone marrow is removed from a person,
stored, and then given back to the person after intensive
treatment.

Avian

Птичий

A plasmodial infection in birds.

Axons

Аксоны

Nerve fibers that are capable of rapidly conducting impulses
away from the neuron cell body.

Bacteria

Бактерии

Unicellular prokaryotic microorganisms which generally
possess rigid cell walls, multiply by cell division, and exhibit
three principal forms: round or coccal, rodlike or bacillary, and
spiral or spirochetal.

Basal ganglia

Базальный ганглий

Large subcortical nuclear masses derived from the
telencephalon and located in the basal regions of the cerebral
hemispheres.

Base

Основание

In chemistry, the nonacid part of a salt; a substance that
combines with acids to form salts; a substance that dissociates
to give hydroxide ions in aqueous solutions; a substance whose
molecule or ion can combine with a proton (hydrogen ion); a
substance capable of donating a pair of electrons (to an acid)
for the formation of a coordinate covalent bond.

Base pairing

Спаривание оснований

Pairing of purine and pyrimidine bases by hydrogen bonding
in double-stranded DNA or RNA.

Base sequence

Нуклеотидная
последовательность

The sequence of purines and pyrimidines in nucleic acids and
polynucleotides. It is also called nucleotide or nucleoside
sequence.

Binding sites

Участки связывания

The reactive parts of a macromolecule that directly participate
in its specific combination with another molecule.

Biochemical

Биохимический

Relating to biochemistry; characterized by, produced by, or
involving chemical reactions in living organisms.

Biological response
modifier

Биологический
модификатор реакции

BRM. A substance that stimulates the body's response to
infection and disease.

Biosynthesis

Биосинтез

The building up of a chemical compound in the physiologic
processes of a living organism.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Biotechnology

Биотехнология

Body of knowledge related to the use of organisms, cells or
cell-derived constituents for the purpose of developing
products which are technically, scientifically and clinically
useful. Alteration of biologic function at the molecular level
(i.e., genetic engineering) is a central focus; laboratory
methods used include transfection and cloning technologies,
sequence and structure analysis algorithms, computer
databases, and gene and protein structure function analysis
and prediction.

Bioterrorism

Биотерроризм

The use of biological agents in terrorism. This includes the
malevolent use of bacteria, viruses, or toxins against people,
animals, or plants.

Bladder

Мочевой пузырь

The organ that stores urine.

Blood pressure

Артериальное давление

The pressure of blood against the walls of a blood vessel or
heart chamber. Unless there is reference to another location,
such as the pulmonary artery or one of the heart chambers, it
refers to the pressure in the systemic arteries, as measured, for
example, in the forearm.

Blood vessel

Кровеносный сосуд

A tube in the body through which blood circulates. Blood
vessels include a network of arteries, arterioles, capillaries,
venules, and veins.

Body fluids

Биологические жидкости

Liquid components of living organisms.

Bone marrow

Костный мозг

The soft tissue filling the cavities of bones. Bone marrow exists
in two types, yellow and red. Yellow marrow is found in the
large cavities of large bones and consists mostly of fat cells and
a few primitive blood cells. Red marrow is a hematopoietic
tissue and is the site of production of erythrocytes and
granular leukocytes. Bone marrow is made up of a framework
of connective tissue containing branching fibers with the
frame being filled with marrow cells.

Bone marrow
transplantation

Трансплантация костного
мозга

The transference of bone marrow from one human or animal
to another.

Bowel

Кишечник

The long tube-shaped organ in the abdomen that completes
the process of digestion. There is both a small and a large
bowel. Also called the intestine.

Bowel movement

Испражнения

Body wastes passed through the rectum and anus.

Brachytherapy

Брахитерапия

A collective term for interstitial, intracavity, and surface
radiotherapy. It uses small sealed or partly sealed sources that
may be placed on or near the body surface or within a natural
body cavity or implanted directly into the tissues.

Bradykinin

Брадикинин

A nonapeptide messenger that is enzymatically produced
from kallidin in the blood where it is a potent but short-lived
agent of arteriolar dilation and increased capillary
permeability. Bradykinin is also released from mast cells
during asthma attacks, from gut walls as a gastrointestinal
vasodilator, from damaged tissues as a pain signal, and may be
a neurotransmitter.

Bronchi

Бронхи

The larger air passages of the lungs arising from the terminal
bifurcation of the trachea.

Bronchitis

Бронхит

Inflammation (swelling and reddening) of the bronchi.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Calcium

Кальций

A basic element found in nearly all organized tissues. It is a
member of the alkaline earth family of metals with the atomic
symbol Ca, atomic number 20, and atomic weight 40. Calcium
is the most abundant mineral in the body and combines with
phosphorus to form calcium phosphate in the bones and
teeth. It is essential for the normal functioning of nerves and
muscles and plays a role in blood coagulation (as factor IV)
and in many enzymatic processes.

Capsid

Капсид

The outer protein protective shell of a virus, which protects
the viral nucleic acid.

Carbohydrate

Углевод

An aldehyde or ketone derivative of a polyhydric alcohol,
particularly of the pentahydric and hexahydric alcohols. They
are so named because the hydrogen and oxygen are usually in
the proportion to form water, (CH2O)n. The most important
carbohydrates are the starches, sugars, celluloses, and gums.
They are classified into mono-, di-, tri-, poly- and
heterosaccharides.

Carbon dioxide

Углекислый газ

A colorless, odorless gas that can be formed by the body and
is necessary for the respiration cycle of plants and animals.

Carboxy

Карбокси

Cannabinoid.

Carboxy-terminal

Карбоксиконцевой

The end of any polypeptide or protein that bears a free
carboxyl group.

Carcinoembryonic
antigen

Карциноэмбриональный
антиген

A glycoprotein that is secreted into the luminal surface of the
epithelia in the gastrointestinal tract. It is found in the feces
and pancreaticobiliary secretions and is used to monitor the
response to colon cancer treatment.

Carcinogenic

Канцерогенный

Producing carcinoma.

Cardiac

Заболевания сердца

Having to do with the heart.

Cardiopulmonary

Сердечно-легочный

Having to do with the heart and lungs.

Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation

Сердечно-легочная
реанимация

The artificial substitution of heart and lung action as indicated
for heart arrest resulting from electric shock, drowning,
respiratory arrest, or other causes. The two major components
of cardiopulmonary resuscitation are artificial ventilation and
closed-chest cardiac massage.

Cardiovascular

Сердечно-сосудистый

Relating to the heart and blood vessels.

Caspase

Каспаза, каспазный

Enzyme released by the cell at a crucial stage in apoptosis in
order to shred all cellular proteins.

Caudal

Каудальный, хвостовой

Denoting a position more toward the cauda, or tail, than some
specified point of reference; same as inferior, in human
anatomy.

Cell

Клетка

The individual unit that makes up all of the tissues of the body.
All living things are made up of one or more cells.

Cell adhesion

Клеточная адгезия

Adherence of cells to surfaces or to other cells.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Cell death

Некроз клеток, гибель
клеток

The termination of the cell's ability to carry out vital functions
such as metabolism, growth, reproduction, responsiveness,
and adaptability.

Cell differentiation

Дифференцировка клеток,
клеточная
дифференциация

Progressive restriction of the developmental potential and
increasing specialization of function which takes place during
the development of the embryo and leads to the formation of
specialized cells, tissues, and organs.

Cell division

Цитокинез, клеточное
деления

The fission of a cell.

Cell fusion

Слияние клеток

Fusion of somatic cells in vitro or in vivo, which results in
somatic cell hybridization.

Cell membrane

Клеточная мембрана

Cell membrane = plasma membrane. The structure enveloping
a cell, enclosing the cytoplasm, and forming a selective
permeability barrier; it consists of lipids, proteins, and some
carbohydrates, the lipids thought to form a bilayer in which
integral proteins are embedded to varying degrees.

Cell proliferation

Пролиферация клеток

An increase in the number of cells as a result of cell growth
and cell division.

Central nervous system

Центральная нервная
система

The main information-processing organs of the nervous
system, consisting of the brain, spinal cord, and meninges.

Cerebral

Церебральный

Of or pertaining of the cerebrum or the brain.

Cerebral hemispheres

Полушария головного
мозга

The two halves of the cerebrum, the part of the brain that
controls muscle functions of the body and also controls
speech, emotions, reading, writing, and learning. The right
hemisphere controls muscle movement on the left side of the
body, and the left hemisphere controls muscle movement on
the right side of the body.

Cerebrospinal

Спинномозговой

Pertaining to the brain and spinal cord.

Cerebrospinal fluid

Спинномозговая жидкость

CSF. The fluid flowing around the brain and spinal cord.
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced in the ventricles in the brain.

Cerebrovascular

Цереброваскулярный

Pertaining to the blood vessels of the cerebrum, or brain.

Cerebrum

Головной мозг

The largest part of the brain. It is divided into two
hemispheres, or halves, called the cerebral hemispheres. The
cerebrum controls muscle functions of the body and also
controls speech, emotions, reading, writing, and learning.

Cervical

Шейный

Relating to the neck, or to the neck of any organ or structure.
Cervical lymph nodes are located in the neck; cervical cancer
refers to cancer of the uterine cervix, which is the lower,
narrow end (the “neck”) of the uterus.

Cervix

Шейка матки

The lower, narrow end of the uterus that forms a canal
between the uterus and vagina.

Chemokines

Хемокины

Class of pro-inflammatory cytokines that have the ability to
attract and activate leukocytes. They can be divided into at
least three structural branches: C (chemokines, C), CC
(chemokines, CC), and CXC (chemokines, CXC), according to
variations in a shared cysteine motif.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Chemotactic factors

Хемотаксические факторы

Chemical substances that attract or repel cells or organisms.
The concept denotes especially those factors released as a
result of tissue injury, invasion, or immunologic activity,
which attract leukocytes, macrophages, or other cells to the
site of infection or insult.

Chimeras

Химеры

Organism that contains a mixture of genetically different cells.

Cholesterol

Холестерин

The principal sterol of all higher animals, distributed in body
tissues, especially the brain and spinal cord, and in animal fats
and oils.

Cholesterol esters

Эфиры холестерина

Fatty acid esters of cholesterol which constitute about twothirds of the cholesterol in the plasma. The accumulation of
cholesterol esters in the arterial intima is a characteristic
feature of atherosclerosis.

Chromatin

Хроматин

The material of chromosomes. It is a complex of DNA,
histones, and nonhistone proteins (chromosomal proteins,
non-histone) found within the nucleus of a cell.

Chromosomal

Хромосомный

Pertaining to chromosomes.

Chromosome

Хромосома

Part of a cell that contains genetic information. Except for
sperm and eggs, all human cells contain 46 chromosomes.

Chronic

Хронический

A disease or condition that persists or progresses over a long
period of time.

Chronic disease

Хроническое заболевание

Disease or ailment of long duration.

Chylomicrons

Хиломикроны

A class of lipoproteins that carry dietary cholesterol and
triglycerides from the small intestines to the tissues.

Chymopapain

Химопапаина

A cysteine endopeptidase isolated from papaya latex.
Preferential cleavage at glutamic and aspartic acid residues.
EC 3.4.22.6.

Chymotrypsin

Химотрипсин

A serine endopeptidase secreted by the pancreas as its
zymogen, chymotrypsinogen and carried in the pancreatic
juice to the duodenum where it is activated by trypsin. It
selectively cleaves aromatic amino acids on the carboxyl side.

CIS

Служба онкологической
информации

Cancer Information Service. The CIS is the National Cancer
Institute's link to the public, interpreting and explaining
research findings in a clear and understandable manner, and
providing personalized responses to specific questions about
cancer. Access the CIS by calling 1-800-4-CANCER, or by using
the Web site at http://cis.nci.nih.gov.

Clathrin

Клатрин

The main structural coat protein of coated vesicles which play
a key role in the intracellular transport between membranous
organelles. Clathrin also interacts with cytoskeletal proteins.

Clinical trial

Клиническое
исследование/ испытание

A research study that tests how well new medical treatments
or other interventions work in people. Each study is designed
to test new methods of screening, prevention, diagnosis, or
treatment of a disease.

Cloning

Клонирование

The production of a number of genetically identical
individuals; in genetic engineering, a process for the efficient
replication of a great number of identical DNA molecules.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Coagulation

Коагуляция

1. The process of clot formation. 2. In colloid chemistry, the
solidification of a sol into a gelatinous mass; an alteration of a
disperse phase or of a dissolved solid which causes the
separation of the system into a liquid phase and an insoluble
mass called the clot or curd. Coagulation is usually
irreversible. 3. In surgery, the disruption of tissue by physical
means to form an amorphous residuum, as in
electrocoagulation and photocoagulation.

Coated vesicles

Окаймленные пузырьки

Vesicles formed when cell-membrane coated pits invaginate
and pinch off. The outer surface of these vesicles is covered
with a lattice-like network of coat proteins, such as clathrin,
coat protein complex proteins, or caveolins.

Codon

Кодон, триплет,
кодирующий триплет

A set of three nucleotides in a protein coding sequence that
specifies individual amino acids or a termination signal
(codon, terminator). Most codons are universal, but some
organisms do not produce the transfer RNAs (RNA, transfer)
complementary to all codons. These codons are referred to as
unassigned codons (codons, nonsense).

Cofactor

Кофактор

A substance, microorganism or environmental factor that
activates or enhances the action of another entity such as a
disease-causing agent.

Colon

Колон, толстая кишка

The long, coiled, tube-like organ that removes water from
digested food. The remaining material, solid waste called
stool, moves through the colon to the rectum and leaves the
body through the anus.

Complement

Комплемент

A term originally used to refer to the heat-labile factor in
serum that causes immune cytolysis, the lysis of antibodycoated cells, and now referring to the entire functionally
related system comprising at least 20 distinct serum proteins
that is the effector not only of immune cytolysis but also of
other biologic functions. Complement activation occurs by
two different sequences, the classic and alternative pathways.
The proteins of the classic pathway are termed 'components
of complement' and are designated by the symbols C1 through
C9. C1 is a calcium-dependent complex of three distinct
proteins C1q, C1r and C1s. The proteins of the alternative
pathway (collectively referred to as the properdin system) and
complement regulatory proteins are known by semi
systematic or trivial names. Fragments resulting from
proteolytic cleavage of complement proteins are designated
with lower-case letter suffixes, e.g., C3a. Inactivated fragments
may be designated with the suffix ‘i’, e.g. C3bi. Activated
components or complexes with biological activity are
designated by a bar over the symbol e.g. C1 or C4b,2a. The
classic pathway is activated by the binding of C1 to classic
pathway activators, primarily antigen-antibody complexes
containing IgM, IgG1, IgG3; C1q binds to a single IgM molecule
or two adjacent IgG molecules. The alternative pathway can
be activated by IgA immune complexes and also by
nonimmunologic materials including bacterial endotoxins,
microbial polysaccharides, and cell walls. Activation of the

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

classic pathway triggers an enzymatic cascade involving C1,
C4, C2 and C3; activation of the alternative pathway triggers a
cascade involving C3 and factors B, D and P. Both result in the
cleavage of C5 and the formation of the membrane attack
complex. Complement activation also results in the formation
of many biologically active complement fragments that act as
anaphylatoxins, opsonins, or chemotactic factors.
Complementary and
alternative medicine

Комплементарная и
нетрадиционная медицина

CAM. Forms of treatment that are used in addition to
(complementary) or instead of (alternative) standard
treatments. These practices are not considered standard
medical approaches. CAM includes dietary supplements,
megadose vitamins, herbal preparations, special teas, massage
therapy, magnet therapy, spiritual healing, and meditation.

Complementary
medicine

Комплементарная
медицина

Practices not generally recognized by the medical community
as standard or conventional medical approaches and used to
enhance or complement the standard treatments.
Complementary medicine includes the taking of dietary
supplements, megadose vitamins, and herbal preparations;
the drinking of special teas; and practices such as massage
therapy, magnet therapy, spiritual healing, and meditation.

Complementation

Комплементация

The production of a wild-type phenotype when two different
mutations are combined in a diploid or a heterokaryon and
tested in trans-configuration.

Computational biology

Вычислительная биология

A field of biology concerned with the development of
techniques for the collection and manipulation of biological
data, and the use of such data to make biological discoveries
or predictions. This field encompasses all computational
methods and theories applicable to molecular biology and
areas of computer-based techniques for solving biological
problems including manipulation of models and datasets.

Computed tomography

Компьютерная томография

CT scan. A series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body,
taken from different angles; the pictures are created by a
computer linked to an x-ray machine. Also called
computerized tomography and computerized axial
tomography (CAT) scan.

Computerized axial
tomography

Компьютерная аксиальная
томография

A series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken
from different angles; the pictures are created by a computer
linked to an x-ray machine. Also called CAT scan, computed
tomography (CT scan), or computerized tomography.

Computerized
tomography

Компьютерная томография

A series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken
from different angles; the pictures are created by a computer
linked to an x-ray machine. Also called computerized axial
tomography (CAT) scan and computed tomography (CT
scan).

Conduction

Проводимость, кондукция

The transfer of sound waves, heat, nervous impulses, or
electricity.

Conjunctiva

Конъюнктива

The mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the
eyelids and the anterior part of the sclera.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Consensus sequence

Консенсусная
последовательность,
каноническая
последовательность

A theoretical representative nucleotide or amino acid
sequence in which each nucleotide or amino acid is the one
which occurs most frequently at that site in the different
sequences which occur in nature. The phrase also refers to an
actual sequence which approximates the theoretical
consensus. A known conserved sequence set is represented by
a consensus sequence. Commonly observed super-secondary
protein structures (amino acid motifs) are often formed by
conserved sequences.

Conserved sequence

Консервативная
последовательность

A sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide or of nucleotides
in DNA or RNA that is similar across multiple species. A
known set of conserved sequences is represented by a
consensus sequence. Amino acid motifs are often composed of
conserved sequences.

Constipation

Запор, констипация

Infrequent or difficult evacuation of feces.

Contamination

Инфицирование,
контаминация; загрязнение
окружающей среды

The soiling or pollution by inferior material, as by the
introduction of organisms into a wound, or sewage into a
stream.

Contraindications

Противопоказания (~к
иммунизации)

Any factor or sign that it is unwise to pursue a certain kind of
action or treatment, e. g. giving a general anesthetic to a
person with pneumonia.

Coordination

Координация

Muscular or motor regulation or the harmonious cooperation
of muscles or groups of muscles, in a complex action or series
of actions.

Corticosteroid

Кортикостероиды

Any of the steroids elaborated by the adrenal cortex (excluding
the sex hormones of adrenal origin) in response to the release
of corticotrophin (adrenocorticotropic hormone) by the
pituitary gland, to any of the synthetic equivalents of these
steroids, or to angiotensin II. They are divided, according to
their predominant biological activity, into three major groups:
glucocorticoids, chiefly influencing carbohydrate, fat, and
protein metabolism; mineralocorticoids, affecting the
regulation of electrolyte and water balance; and C19
androgens. Some corticosteroids exhibit both types of activity
in varying degrees, and others exert only one type of effect.
The corticosteroids are used clinically for hormonal
replacement therapy, for suppression of ACTH secretion by
the anterior pituitary, as antineoplastic, antiallergic, and antiinflammatory agents, and to suppress the immune response.
Called also adrenocortical hormone and corticoid.

Cortisone

Кортизон

A natural steroid hormone produced in the adrenal gland. It
can also be made in the laboratory. Cortisone reduces swelling
and can suppress immune responses.

Cowpox

Коровья оспа

A mild, eruptive skin disease of milk cows caused by cowpox
virus, with lesions occurring principally on the udder and
teats. Human infection may occur while milking an infected
animal.

Cowpox virus

Вирус коровьей оспы

A species of orthopoxvirus that is the etiologic agent of
cowpox. It is closely related to but antigenically different from
vaccina virus.

Creatinine

Креатинин

A compound that is excreted from the body in urine.
Creatinine levels are measured to monitor kidney function.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Crossing-over

Кроссинговер

The exchange of corresponding segments between chromatids
of homologous chromosomes during meiosia, forming a
chiasma.

Cultured cells

Культивируемые клетки

Animal or human cells that are grown in the laboratory.

Curative

Целебный

Tending to overcome disease and promote recovery.

Cutaneous

Кожный

Having to do with the skin.

Cyclic

Циклический

Pertaining to or occurring in a cycle or cycles; the term is
applied to chemical compounds that contain a ring of atoms
in the nucleus.

Cycloheximide

Циклогексимид

Antibiotic substance isolated from streptomycin-producing
strains of Streptomyces griseus. It acts by inhibiting
elongation during protein synthesis.

Cyst

Циста

A sac or capsule filled with fluid.

Cysteine

Цистеин, цис

A thiol-containing non-essential amino acid that is oxidized to
form cystine.

Cystine

Цистин

A covalently linked dimeric nonessential amino acid formed
by the oxidation of cysteine. Two molecules of cysteine are
joined together by a disulfide bridge to form cystine.

Cytokine

Цитокина

Small but highly potent protein that modulates the activity of
many cell types, including T and B cells.

Cytoplasm

Цитоплазма

The protoplasm of a cell exclusive of that of the nucleus; it
consists of a continuous aqueous solution (cytosol) and the
organelles and inclusions suspended in it (phaneroplasm) and
is the site of most of the chemical activities of the cell.

Cytoskeleton

Цитоскелет

The network of filaments, tubules, and interconnecting
filamentous bridges which give shape, structure, and
organization to the cytoplasm.

Cytotoxic

Цитотоксический

Cell-killing.

Cytotoxicity

Цитотоксичность

Quality of being capable of producing a specific toxic action
upon cells of special organs.

Deamination

Дезаминирование

The removal of an amino group (NH2) from a chemical
compound.

Degenerative

Дегенеративный

Undergoing degeneration: tending to degenerate; having the
character of or involving degeneration; causing or tending to
cause degeneration.

Dehydration

Дегидратация,
обезвоживание

The condition that results from excessive loss of body water.

Deletion

Делеция

A genetic rearrangement through loss of segments of DNA
(chromosomes), bringing sequences, which are normally
separated, into close proximity.

Delivery of health care

Оказание медицинской
помощи

The concept concerned with all aspects of providing and
distributing health services to a patient population.

Demyelinating diseases

Демиелинизирующее
заболевание

Diseases characterized by loss or dysfunction of myelin in the
central or peripheral nervous system.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Denaturation

Денатурация

Rupture of the hydrogen bonds by heating a DNA solution and
then cooling it rapidly causes the two complementary strands
to separate.

Dendrites

Дендриты

Extensions of the nerve cell body. They are short and branched
and receive stimuli from other neurons.

Dendritic

1. Древовидный;
2. Дендритный

1. Branched like a tree.
2. Pertaining to or possessing dendrites.

Dendritic cell

Дендритная клетка,
разветвленная клетка

A special type of antigen-presenting cell (APC) that activates
T lymphocytes.

Dental care

Стоматологическое
обслуживание

The total of dental diagnostic, preventive, and restorative
services provided to meet the needs of a patient (from
Illustrated Dictionary of Dentistry, 1982).

Depolarization

Деполяризация

The process or act of neutralizing polarity. In
neurophysiology, the reversal of the resting potential in
excitable cell membranes when stimulated, i.e., the tendency
of the cell membrane potential to become positive with
respect to the potential outside the cell.

Desquamation

Десквамация

The shedding of epithelial elements, chiefly of the skin, in
scales or small sheets; exfoliation.

Dexamethasone

Дексаметазон

(11
beta,16
alpha)-9-Fluoro-11,17,21-trihydroxy-16methylpregna-1,4- diene-3,20-dione. An anti-inflammatory
glucocorticoid used either in the free alcohol or esterified form
in treatment of conditions that respond generally to cortisone.

Diagnostic procedure

Диагностическая
процедура

A method used to identify a disease.

Diarrhea (diarrhoea)

Диарея

Passage of excessively liquid or excessively frequent stools.

Diastolic

Диастолический

Relating to the phase of the heartbeat when the heart muscle
relaxes and allows the chambers to fill with blood.

Diffusion

Диффузия

The tendency of a gas or solute to pass from a point of higher
pressure or concentration to a point of lower pressure or
concentration and to distribute itself throughout the available
space; a major mechanism of biological transport.

Digestion

Пищеварение,
пищеварительный

The process of breakdown of food for metabolism and use by
the body.

Diploid

Диплоид

Having two sets of chromosomes.

Direct

Прямой, непосредственный

1. Straight; in a straight line. 2. Performed immediately and
without the intervention of subsidiary means.

Disease progression

Прогрессирование
заболевания/ течение
болезни

The worsening of a disease over time. This concept is most
often used for chronic and incurable diseases where the stage
of the disease is an important determinant of therapy and
prognosis.

Distal

Дистальный

Remote; farther from any point of reference; opposed to
proximal. In dentistry, used to designate a position on the
dental arch farther from the median line of the jaw.

Drug design

Драг-дизайн, разработка
(конструирование)
лекарственного средства

The molecular designing of drugs for specific purposes (such
as DNA- binding, enzyme inhibition, anti-cancer efficacy, etc.)
based on knowledge of molecular properties such as activity
of functional groups, molecular geometry, and electronic

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

structure, and also on information catalogued on analogous
molecules. Drug design is generally computer-assisted
molecular modelling and does not include pharmacokinetics,
dosage analysis, or drug administration analysis.
Drug interactions

Взаимодействия с другими
лекарственными
препаратами

The action of a drug that may affect the activity, metabolism,
or toxicity of another drug.

Duct

Проток

A tube through which body fluids pass.

Duodenum

Двенадцатиперстная кишка

The first part of the small intestine.

Dysentery

Дизентерия

Any of various disorders marked by inflammation of the
intestines, especially of the colon, and attended by pain in the
abdomen, tenesmus, and frequent stools containing blood and
mucus. Causes include chemical irritants, bacteria, protozoa,
or parasitic worms.

Ebola virus

Вирус Эбола

A species of filovirus which causes a form of African viral
hemorrhagic fever first reported from an outbreak in the
Yambuku area of (what was then) Zaire in 1976.

Effector

Эффектор

It is often an enzyme that converts an inactive precursor
molecule into an active second messenger.

Efficacy

Эффективность
(~исследование
эффективности
препарата)

The extent to which a specific intervention, procedure,
regimen, or service produces a beneficial result under ideal
conditions. Ideally, the determination of efficacy is based on
the results of a randomized control trial.

Egg yolk

Яичный желток

Cytoplasm stored in an egg that contains nutritional reserves
for the developing embryo. It is rich in polysaccharides, lipids,
and proteins.

Elective

1) Элективный,
избирательный (~о
действии лекарственного
средства);
2) Рекомендуемый, но не
обязательный,
факультативный (~о
лечебной процедуре)

Subject to the choice or decision of the patient or physician;
applied to procedures that are advantageous to the patient but
not urgent.

Electric shock

Поражение электрическим
током

A dangerous patho-physiological effect resulting from an
electric current passing through the body of a human or
animal.

Electrocoagulation

Электрокоагуляция

Electrosurgical procedures used to treat hemorrhage (e.g.,
bleeding ulcers) and to ablate tumors, mucosal lesions, and
refractory arrhythmias.

Electrolyte

Электролит

A substance that dissociates into ions when fused or in
solution, and thus becomes capable of conducting electricity;
an ionic solute.

Electrons

Электроны

Stable elementary particles having the smallest known
negative charge, present in all elements; also called negatrons.
Positively charged electrons are called positrons. The
numbers, energies, and arrangement of electrons around
atomic nuclei determine the chemical identities of elements.
Beams of electrons are called cathode rays or beta rays, the
latter being a high-energy biproduct of nuclear decay.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Embryo

Эмбрион

The prenatal stage of mammalian development characterized
by rapid morphological changes and the differentiation of
basic structures.

Emulsion

Эмульсия

A preparation of one liquid distributed in small globules
throughout the body of a second liquid. The dispersed liquid
is the discontinuous phase, and the dispersion medium is the
continuous phase. When oil is the dispersed liquid and an
aqueous solution is the continuous phase, it is known as an
oil-in-water emulsion, whereas when water or aqueous
solution is the dispersed phase and oil or oleaginous substance
is the continuous phase, it is known as a water-in-oil emulsion.
Pharmaceutical emulsions for which official standards have
been promulgated include cod liver oil emulsion, cod liver oil
emulsion with malt, liquid petrolatum emulsion, and
phenolphthalein in liquid petrolatum emulsion.

Encephalitis

Энцефалит

Inflammation of the brain due to infection, autoimmune
processes, toxins, and other conditions. Viral infections (see
encephalitis, viral) are a relatively frequent cause of this
condition.

Encephalitis, viral

Энцефалит, вирусный

Inflammation of brain parenchymal tissue as a result of viral
infection. Encephalitis may occur as primary or secondary
manifestation of Togaviridae infections; Herpesviridae
infections; Adenoviridae infections; Flaviviridae infections;
Bunyaviridae
infections;
Picornaviridae
infections;
Paramyxoviridae infections; Orthomyxoviridae infections;
Retroviridae infections; and Arenaviridae infections.

Encephalomyelitis

Энцефаломиелит

A general term indicating inflammation of the brain and spinal
cord, often used to indicate an infectious process, but also
applicable to a variety of autoimmune and toxic-metabolic
conditions. There is significant overlap regarding the usage of
this term and encephalitis in the literature.

Endemic

1. Эндемический; эндемия,
вспышка (~заболевание);
2. Эндемик; краевой
(~свойственный
местности)

Present or usually prevalent in a population or geographical
area at all times; said of a disease or agent. Called also
endemial.

Endocytosis

Эндоцитоз

Cellular uptake of extracellular materials within membranelimited vacuoles or microvesicles. Endosomes play a central
role in endocytosis.

Endosomes

Эндосомы

Cytoplasmic vesicles formed when coated vesicles shed their
clathrin coat. Endosomes internalize macromolecules bound
by receptors on the cell surface.

Endothelium

Эндотелий

A layer of epithelium that lines the heart, blood vessels
(endothelium, vascular), lymph vessels (endothelium,
lymphatic), and the serous cavities of the body.

Endothelium-derived

Эндотелиальный

Small molecule that diffuses to the adjacent muscle layer and
relaxes it.

Endotoxin

Эндотоксин

Toxin from cell walls of bacteria.

Enteritis

Энтерит

Inflammation of the intestine applied chiefly to inflammation
of the small intestine; see also enterocolitis.

Enterocolitis

Энтероколит

Inflammation of the intestinal mucosa of the small and large
bowel.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Enterocytes

Энтероциты

Terminally differentiated cells comprising the majority of the
external surface of the intestinal epithelium (see intestinal
mucosa). Unlike goblet cells, they do not produce or secrete
mucins, nor do they secrete cryptdins as do the paneth cells.

Enteropeptidase

Энтеропептидаза,
энтерокиназа

A specialized proteolytic enzyme secreted by intestinal cells.
It converts trypsinogen into its active form trypsin by
removing the N-terminal peptide. EC 3.4.21.9.

Environmental health

Состояние окружающей
среды

The science of controlling or modifying those conditions,
influences, or forces surrounding man which relate to
promoting, establishing, and maintaining health.

Enzymatic

Ферментативный,
энзиматический,
биокаталитический

Phase where enzyme cuts the precursor protein.

Enzyme

Энзим, фермент

A protein that speeds up chemical reactions in the body.

Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay
(ELISA)

Иммуноферментный
(твердофазный) анализ
(ИФА)

An immunoassay utilizing an antibody labelled with an
enzyme marker such as horseradish peroxidase. While either
the enzyme or the antibody is bound to an immunosorbent
substrate, they both retain their biologic activity; the change
in enzyme activity as a result of the enzyme-antibody-antigen
reaction is proportional to the concentration of the antigen
and can be measured spectrophotometrically or with the
naked eye. Many variations of the method have been
developed.

Ependymal

Эпендимальный,
эпендимный

It lines the cavities of the brain's ventricles and the spinal cord
and slowly divides to create a stem cell.

Epidemic

Эпидемический,
повальный (~болезнь);
эпидемия, вспышка

Occurring suddenly in numbers clearly in excess of normal
expectancy; said especially of infectious diseases but applied
also to any disease, injury, or other health- related event
occurring in such outbreaks.

Epinephrine

Эпинефрин, адреналин

The active sympathomimetic hormone from the adrenal
medulla in most species. It stimulates both the alpha- and
beta- adrenergic systems, causes systemic vasoconstriction
and gastrointestinal relaxation, stimulates the heart, and
dilates bronchi and cerebral vessels. It is used in asthma and
cardiac failure and to delay absorption of local anesthetics.

Epithelial

Эпителиальный

Refers to the cells that line the internal and external surfaces
of the body.

Epithelial cells

Эпителиальные клетки

Cells that line the inner and outer surfaces of the body.

Epithelium

Эпителий

One or more layers of epithelial cells, supported by the basal
lamina, which covers the inner or outer surfaces of the body.

Epitope

Эпитоп

A molecule or portion of a molecule capable of binding to the
combining site of an antibody. For every given antigenic
determinant, the body can construct a variety of antibodycombining sites, some of which fit almost perfectly, and others
which barely fit.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Epizootic

Эпизоотический;
эпизоотия

A disease of high morbidity which is only occasionally present
in an animal community: it affects a great number of animals
in a large area of land at the same time and spreads with great
rapidity over a wide territory.

Erythrocytes

Эритроциты

Red blood cells. Mature erythrocytes are non-nucleated,
biconcave disks containing hemoglobin whose function is to
transport oxygen.

Esophagus

Пищевод

The muscular tube through which food passes from the throat
to the stomach.

Eukaryotic cells

Эукариотические клетки

Cells of the higher organisms, containing a true nucleus
bounded by a nuclear membrane.

Exfoliation

Эксфолиант

A falling off in scales or layers.

Exhaustion

Истощение

The feeling of weariness of mind and body.

External-beam
radiation

Дистанционная лучевая
терапия, внешнее
излучение

Radiation therapy that uses a machine to aim high-energy rays
at the cancer. Also called external radiation.

Extracellular

Внеклеточный

Outside a cell or cells.

Eye infections

Глазные инфекции

Infection, moderate to severe, caused by bacteria, fungi, or
viruses, which occurs either on the external surface of the eye
or intraocularly with probable inflammation, visual
impairment, or blindness.

Fecal (faecal)

Фекальный

Pertaining to or of the nature of feces.

Family planning

Планирование размера
семьи

Programs or services designed to assist the family in
controlling reproduction by either improving or diminishing
fertility.

Fat

Жир, жировой; жировая
клетчатка

Total lipids including phospholipids.

Fatty acids

Жирные кислоты

A major component of fats that are used by the body for energy
and tissue development.

Feces (faeces)

Кал, фекалии;
испражнение, экскременты

The excrement discharged from the intestines, consisting of
bacteria, cells exfoliated from the intestines, secretions, chiefly
of the liver, and a small amount of food residue.

Feline infectious
peritonitis

Кошачий инфекционный
перитонит

Common coronavirus infection of cats caused by the feline
infectious peritonitis virus. The disease is characterized by a
long incubation period, fever, depression, loss of appetite,
wasting, and progressive abdominal enlargement. Infection of
cells of the monocyte-macrophage lineage appears to be
essential in FIP pathogenesis.

Ferrets

Хорьки

Semidomesticated variety of European polecat much used for
hunting rodents and/or rabbits and as a laboratory animal.

Fibrin

Фибрин

A protein derived from fibrinogen in the presence of
thrombin, which forms part of the blood clot.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Fibrinogen

Фибриноген

Plasma glycoprotein clotted by thrombin, composed of a
dimer of three nonidentical pairs of polypeptide chains (alpha,
beta, gamma) held together by disulfide bonds. Fibrinogen
clotting is a sol-gel change involving complex molecular
arrangements: whereas fibrinogen is cleaved by thrombin to
form polypeptides A and B, the proteolytic action of other
enzymes yields different fibrinogen degradation products.

Fibrosis

Фиброз, фиброзный

Any pathological condition where fibrous connective tissue
invades any organ, usually as a consequence of inflammation
or other injury.

Filovirus

Филовирус

A genus of the family Filoviridae containing two species: Ebola
virus and Marburg virus. Both were originally associated with
African monkeys but are capable of causing severe
hemorrhagic disease in humans. The natural host of either
virus is unknown. Transmission is by close personal contact.

Fixation

1. Фиксация; 2. Связывание,
укрепление

1. The use of a fixative (q.v.) to preserve histological or
cytological specimens. 2. In chemistry, the process whereby a
substance is removed from the gaseous or solution phase and
localized, as in carbon dioxide fixation or nitrogen fixation.

Fluorescence

Флуоресценция

The property of emitting radiation while being irradiated. The
radiation emitted is usually of longer wavelength than that
incident or absorbed, e.g., a substance can be irradiated with
invisible radiation and emit visible light. X-ray fluorescence is
used in diagnosis.

Fold

Складка

A plication or doubling of various parts of the body.

Fovea

Ямка, углубление; впадина

The central part of the macula that provides the sharpest
vision.

Frameshift

Сдвиг рамки (считывания)
(~генетического кода)

A type of mutation which causes out-of-phase transcription of
the base sequence; such mutations arise from the addition or
deletion of nucleotide(s) in numbers other than 3 or multiples
of 3.

Frameshift mutation

Мутация со сдвигом рамки
(считывания)

A type of mutation in which a number of nucleotides not
divisible by three is deleted from or inserted into a coding
sequence, thereby causing an alteration in the reading frame
of the entire sequence downstream of the mutation. These
mutations may be induced by certain types of mutagens or
may occur spontaneously.

Ganglia

Ганглии

Clusters of multipolar neurons surrounded by a capsule of
loosely organized connective tissue located outside the central
nervous system.

Gas

Газ

Air that comes from normal breakdown of food. The gases are
passed out of the body through the rectum (flatus) or the
mouth (burp).

Gastric

Желудочный

Having to do with the stomach.

Gastroenteritis

Гастроэнтерит

An acute inflammation of the lining of the stomach and
intestines, characterized by anorexia, nausea, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, and weakness, which has various causes,
including food poisoning due to infection with such organisms
as Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Salmonella
species; consumption of irritating food or drink; or
psychological factors such as anger, stress, and fear. Called
also enterogastritis.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Gastrointestinal

Желудочно-кишечный

Refers to the stomach and intestines.

Gastrointestinal tract

Желудочно-кишечный
тракт

The stomach and intestines.

Gene

Ген

The functional and physical unit of heredity passed from
parent to offspring. Genes are pieces of DNA, and most genes
contain the information for making a specific protein.

Gene deletion

Делеция гена

A genetic rearrangement through loss of segments of DNA or
RNA, bringing sequences which are normally separated into
close proximity. This deletion may be detected using
cytogenetic techniques and can also be inferred from the
phenotype, indicating a deletion at one specific locus.

Gene expression

Экспрессия гена

The phenotypic manifestation of a gene or genes by the
processes of gene action.

Gene order

Порядок гена

The sequential location of genes on a chromosome.

Gene therapy

Генотерапия, генная
терапия

The introduction of new genes into cells for the purpose of
treating disease by restoring or adding gene expression.
Techniques include insertion of retroviral vectors,
transfection, homologous recombination, and injection of
new genes into the nuclei of single cell embryos. The entire
gene therapy process may consist of multiple steps. The new
genes may be introduced into proliferating cells in vivo (e.g.,
bone marrow) or in vitro (e.g., fibroblast cultures) and the
modified cells transferred to the site where the gene
expression is required. Gene therapy may be particularly
useful
for
treating
enzyme
deficiency
diseases,
hemoglobinopathies, and leukemias and may also prove useful
in restoring drug sensitivity, particularly for leukemia.

Genetic code

Генетический код

The specifications for how information, stored in nucleic acid
sequence (base sequence), is translated into protein sequence
(amino acid sequence). The start, stop, and order of amino
acids of a protein is specified by consecutive triplets of
nucleotides called codons (codon).

Genetic engineering

Генетическая/ генная
инженерия

Directed modification of the gene complement of a living
organism by such techniques as altering the DNA, substituting
genetic material by means of a virus, transplanting whole
nuclei, transplanting cell hybrids, etc.

Genetic testing

Генетический анализ

Analyzing DNA to look for a genetic alteration that may
indicate an increased risk for developing a specific disease or
disorder.

Genetics

Генетика, генетическая
наследственность

The biological science that deals with the phenomena and
mechanisms of heredity.

Genomics

Геномика

The systematic study of the complete DNA sequences
(genome) of organisms.

Genotype

Генотип

The genetic constitution
characterization of the genes.

Germ cells

Зародышевые клетки,
половые зародышевые
клетки

The reproductive cells in multicellular organisms.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

of

the

individual;

the

www.transcendwithwords.com

Gland

Железа

An organ that produces and releases one or more substances
for use in the body. Some glands produce fluids that affect
tissues or organs. Others produce hormones or participate in
blood production.

Glioblastoma

Глиобластома

A malignant form of astrocytoma histologically characterized
by pleomorphism of cells, nuclear atypia, microhemorrhage,
and necrosis. They may arise in any region of the central
nervous system, with a predilection for the cerebral
hemispheres, basal ganglia, and commissural pathways.
Clinical presentation most frequently occurs in the fifth or
sixth decade of life with focal neurologic signs or seizures.

Glomerulus

Клубочек, гломерула

A tiny set of looping blood vessels in the nephron where blood
is filtered in the kidney.

Glucocorticoid

Глюкокортикоид

A compound that belongs to the family of compounds called
corticosteroids (steroids). Glucocorticoids affect metabolism
and have anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects.
They may be naturally produced (hormones) or synthetic
(drugs).

Glycine

Глицин

A non-essential amino acid. It is found primarily in gelatin and
silk fibroin and used therapeutically as a nutrient. It is also a
fast-inhibitory neurotransmitter.

Glycoprotein

Гликопротеин,
гликопротеид

A protein that has sugar molecules attached to it.

Glycosidic

Гликозидный

Formed by elimination of water between the anomeric
hydroxyl of one sugar and a hydroxyl of another sugar
molecule.

Glycosylation

Гликозилирование

The chemical or biochemical addition of carbohydrate or
glycosyl groups to other chemicals, especially peptides or
proteins. Glycosyl transferases are used in this biochemical
reaction.

Goblet cells

Кубические клетки

Cells of the epithelial lining that produce and secrete mucins.

Governing board

Орган (совет) управления

The group in which legal authority is vested for the control of
health- related institutions and organizations.

GP120

Гликопротеин
оболочки/оболочечный
гликопротеин/ конверт
гликопротеин GP120

120-kD HIV envelope glycoprotein which is involved in the
binding of the virus to its membrane receptor, the CD4
molecule, found on the surface of certain cells in the body.

Granulocytes

Гранулоциты

Leukocytes with abundant granules in the cytoplasm. They are
divided into three groups: neutrophils, eosinophils, and
basophils.

Guanylate cyclase

Гуанилат циклаза,
гуанилатциклаза

An enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of GTP to 3',5'-cyclic
GMP and pyrophosphate. It also acts on ITP and dGTP. (From
Enzyme Nomenclature, 1992) EC 4.6.1.2.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Hantavirus

Хантавирус

A genus of the family Bunyaviridae causing Hantavirus
infections, first identified during the Korean war. Infection is
found primarily in rodents and humans. Transmission does
not appear to involve arthropods. The genus has one
recognized group (Hantaan group) consisting of several
species including Dobrava-Belgrade virus, Seoul virus,
Prospect Hill virus, Puumala virus, Thottapalayam virus, and
Hantaan virus, the type species.

Haploid

Гаплоид

An organism with one basic chromosome set, symbolized by
n; the normal condition of gametes in diploids.

Headache

Головная боль,

Pain in the cranial region that may occur as an isolated and
benign symptom or as a manifestation of a wide variety of
conditions
including
subarachnoid
hemorrhage;
craniocerebral trauma; central nervous system infections;
intracranial hypertension; and other disorders. In general,
recurrent headaches that are not associated with a primary
disease process are referred to as headache disorders (e.g.,
migraine).

Health care costs

Затраты на
здравоохранение; расходы
на медицинское
обслуживание

The actual costs of providing services related to the delivery of
health care, including the costs of procedures, therapies, and
medications. It is differentiated from health expenditures,
which refers to the amount of money paid for the services, and
from fees, which refers to the amount charged, regardless of
cost.

Health expenditures

Расходы на медицинское
обслуживание и
здравоохранение

The amounts spent by individuals, groups, nations, or private
or public organizations for total health care and/or its various
components. These amounts may or may not be equivalent to
the actual costs (health care costs) and may or may not be
shared among the patient, insurers, and/or employers.

Heart arrest

Остановка сердца

Sudden and usually momentary cessation of the heartbeat.
This sudden cessation may, but not usually, lead to death,
sudden, cardiac.

Hemoglobin
(haemoglobin)

Гемоглобин

One of the fractions of glycosylated hemoglobin A1c.
Glycosylated hemoglobin is formed when linkages of glucose
and related monosaccharides bind to hemoglobin A and its
concentration represents the average blood glucose level over
the previous several weeks. HbA1c levels are used as a measure
of long-term control of plasma glucose (normal, 4 to 6
percent). In controlled diabetes mellitus, the concentration of
glycosylated hemoglobin A is within the normal range, but in
uncontrolled cases the level may be 3 to 4 times the normal
concentration. Generally, complications are substantially
lower among patients with Hb levels of 7 percent or less than
in patients with HbA1c levels of 9 percent or more.

Hemoglobinopathies

Гемоглобинопатии

A group of inherited disorders characterized by structural
alterations within the hemoglobin molecule.

Hepatitis

Гепатит

Inflammation of the liver and liver disease involving
degenerative or necrotic alterations of hepatocytes.

Hepatitis C

Гепатит C

A form of hepatitis, similar to type B post-transfusion
hepatitis, but caused by a virus which is serologically distinct
from the agents of hepatitis A, B, and E, and which may persist
in the blood of chronic asymptomatic carriers. Hepatitis C is

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

parenterally transmitted and associated with transfusions and
drug abuse.

Hepatitis viruses

Вирусы гепатита

Any of the viruses that cause inflammation of the liver. They
include both DNA and RNA viruses as well viruses from
humans and animals.

Hepatocytes

Гепатоциты

The main structural component of the liver. They are
specialized epithelial cells that are organized into
interconnected plates called lobules.

Hepatoma

Гепатома

A liver tumor.

Heredity

Наследственность; 2.
Унаследованные
особенности

1. The genetic transmission of a particular quality or trait from
parent to offspring. 2. The genetic constitution of an
individual.

Heterogeneity

Гетерогенность

The property of one or more samples or populations which
implies that they are not identical in respect of some or all of
their parameters, e. g. heterogeneity of variance.

Histology

Гистология

The study of tissues and cells under a microscope.

Homologous

Гомологичный

Corresponding in structure, position, origin, etc., as (a) the
feathers of a bird and the scales of a fish, (b) antigen and its
specific antibody, (c) allelic chromosomes.

Homotypic

Гомотипический

Adhesion between neutrophils.

Hormonal

Гормональный

Pertaining to or of the nature of a hormone.

Hormone

Гормон, гормональный

A substance in the body that regulates certain organs.
Hormones such as gastrin help in breaking down food. Some
hormones come from cells in the stomach and small intestine.

Horseradish peroxidase

Пероксидаза из хрена

An enzyme isolated from horseradish which is able to act as
an antigen. It is frequently used as a histochemical tracer for
light and electron microscopy. Its antigenicity has permitted
its use as a combined antigen and marker in experimental
immunology.

Host-cell

Клетка организманосителя, клетка-хозяин

A cell whose metabolism is used for the growth and
reproduction of a virus.

Humoral

Гуморальный

Of, relating to, proceeding from, or involving a bodily
humor— now often used of endocrine factors as opposed to
neural or somatic.

Humor (humour)

1. Тканевая жидкость, влага;
2. Экстракт, вытяжка

1. A normal functioning fluid or semifluid of the body (as the
blood, lymph or bile) especially of vertebrates. 2. A secretion
that is itself an excitant of activity (as certain hormones).

Hybrid

Гибрид

Cross fertilization between two varieties or, more usually, two
species of vines, see also crossing.

Hybridization

Гибридизация

The genetic process of crossbreeding to produce a hybrid.
Hybrid nucleic acids can be formed by nucleic acid
hybridization of DNA and RNA molecules. Protein
hybridization allows for hybrid proteins to be formed from
polypeptide chains.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Hydrogen

Водородный

The first chemical element in the periodic table. It has the
atomic symbol H, atomic number 1, and atomic weight 1. It
exists, under normal conditions, as a colorless, odorless,
tasteless, diatomic gas. Hydrogen ions are protons. Besides the
common H1 isotope, hydrogen exists as the stable isotope
deuterium and the unstable, radioactive isotope tritium.

Hydrogen bonding

Водородная связь

A low-energy attractive force between hydrogen and another
element. It plays a major role in determining the properties of
water, proteins, and other compounds.

Hydrolysis

Гидролиз

The process of cleaving a chemical compound by the addition
of a molecule of water.

Hydrophobic

Гидрофобный

Not readily absorbing water, or being adversely affected by
water, as a hydrophobic colloid.

Ileostomy

Илеостомия

Surgical creation of an external opening into the ileum for
fecal diversion or drainage. Loop or tube procedures are most
often employed.

Immune response

Иммунный ответ

The activity of the immune system against foreign substances
(antigens).

Immune sera

Иммунные сыворотки

Serum that contains antibodies. It is obtained from an animal
that has been immunized either by antigen injection or
infection with microorganisms containing the antigen.

Immune system

Иммунная система

The organs, cells, and molecules responsible for the
recognition and disposal of foreign ("non-self") material which
enters the body.

Immunity

Иммунитет

Nonsusceptibility to the invasive or pathogenic effects of
foreign microorganisms or to the toxic effect of antigenic
substances.

Immunization

Иммунизация, вакцинация

Deliberate stimulation of the host's immune response. Active
immunization involves administration of antigens or
immunologic adjuvants. Passive immunization involves
administration of immune sera or lymphocytes or their
extracts (e.g., transfer factor, immune RNA) or transplantation
of immunocompetent cell producing tissue (thymus or bone
marrow).

Immunoassay

Иммуноанализ

Immunochemical assay or detection of a substance by
serologic or immunologic methods. Usually the substance
being studied serves as antigen both in antibody production
and in measurement of antibody by the test substance.

Immunocompromised

С иммунодефицитом, с
иммунной
недостаточностью

Having a weakened immune system caused by certain diseases
or treatments.

Immunodeficiency

Иммунодефицит

The decreased ability of the body to fight infection and
disease.

Immunodiffusion

Иммунодиффузия

Technique involving the diffusion of antigen or antibody
through a semisolid medium, usually agar or agarose gel, with
the result being a precipitin reaction.

Immunofluorescence

Иммунофлуоресценция

A technique for identifying molecules present on the surfaces
of cells or in tissues using a highly fluorescent substance
coupled to a specific antibody.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Immunogenic

Иммуногенный

Producing immunity; evoking an immune response.

Immunohistochemistry

Иммуногистохимия,
иммуногистохимическое
исследование

Histochemical localization of immunoreactive substances
using labelled antibodies as reagents.

Immunologic

Иммунологический

The ability of the antibody-forming system to recall a previous
experience with an antigen and to respond to a second
exposure with the prompt production of large amounts of
antibody.

Immunology

Иммунология

The study of the body's immune system.

Immunotherapy

Иммунотерапия

Manipulation of the host's immune system in treatment of
disease. It includes both active and passive immunization as
well as immunosuppressive therapy to prevent graft rejection.

Immunotoxins

Иммунотоксины

Semisynthetic conjugates of various toxic molecules,
including radioactive isotopes and bacterial or plant toxins,
with specific immune substances such as immunoglobulins,
monoclonal antibodies, and antigens. The antitumor or
antiviral immune substance carries the toxin to the tumor or
infected cell where the toxin exerts its poisonous effect.

Implant radiation
therapy

Внутренняя лучевая
терапия, терапия
близкофокусным
радиоактивным
излучением, контактная
лучевая терапия

A procedure in which radioactive material sealed in needles,
seeds, wires, or catheters is placed directly into or near the
tumor. Also called brachytherapy, internal radiation therapy,
and radiation brachytherapy.

In situ

in situ, на месте,
локальный, местный

In the natural or normal place; confined to the site of origin
without invasion of neighboring tissues.

In situ hybridization

Гибридизация in situ

A technique that localizes specific nucleic acid sequences
within intact chromosomes, eukaryotic cells, or bacterial cells
through the use of specific nucleic acid-labelled probes.

In vitro

in vitro (в лабораторных
условиях, вне живого
организма)

In the laboratory (outside the body). The opposite of in vivo
(in the body).

In vivo

in vivo (в естественных
условиях, в живом
организме)

In the body. The opposite of in vitro (outside the body or in
the laboratory).

Incompetence

Некомпетентность
(~иммунологическая
некомпетентность)

Physical or mental inadequacy or insufficiency.

Incubation

Инкубация,
термостатирование,
выдерживание в термостате

The development of an infectious disease from the entrance of
the pathogen to the appearance of clinical symptoms.

Incubation period

Инкубационный период,
период инкубационный

The period of time likely to elapse between exposure to the
agent of the disease and the onset of clinical symptoms.

Induction

Индукция, индукционный

The act or process of inducing or causing to occur, especially
the production of a specific morphogenetic effect in the
developing embryo through the influence of evocators or
organizers, or the production of anesthesia or
unconsciousness by use of appropriate agents.

Infant, newborn

Младенец, новорожденный

An infant during the first month after birth.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Infection

Инфекция,
инфицирование, заражение

1. Invasion and multiplication of microorganisms in body
tissues, which may be clinically unapparent or result in local
cellular injury due to competitive metabolism, toxins,
intracellular replication, or antigen-antibody response. The
infection may remain localized, subclinical, and temporary if
the body's defensive mechanisms are effective. A local
infection may persist and spread by extension to become an
acute, subacute, or chronic clinical infection or disease state.
A local infection may also become systemic when the
microorganisms gain access to the lymphatic or vascular
system. 2. An infectious disease.

Infiltration

Инфильтрация,
процеживание,
просачивание

The diffusion or accumulation in a tissue or cells of substances
not normal to it or in amounts of the normal. Also, the
material so accumulated.

Inflammation

Воспаление

A pathological process characterized by injury or destruction
of tissues caused by a variety of cytologic and chemical
reactions. It is usually manifested by typical signs of pain, heat,
redness, swelling, and loss of function.

Influenza

Грипп

An acute viral infection involving the respiratory tract. It is
marked by inflammation of the nasal mucosa, the pharynx,
and conjunctiva, and by headache and severe, often
generalized, myalgia.

Infusion

Инфузия, вливание

A method of putting fluids, including drugs, into the
bloodstream. Also called intravenous infusion.

Initiation

Инициация

Mutation induced by a chemical reactive substance causing
cell changes; being a step in a carcinogenic process.

Initiator

Инициатор

A chemically reactive substance which may cause cell changes
if ingested, inhaled or absorbed into the body; the substance
may thus initiate a carcinogenic process.

Insight

Осознание

The capacity to understand one's own motives, to be aware of
one's own psychodynamics, to appreciate the meaning of
symbolic behavior.

Insulator

Инсулятор

Material covering the metal conductor of the lead. It is usually
polyurethane or silicone.

Intensive care

Интенсивная терапия

Advanced and highly specialized care provided to medical or
surgical patients whose conditions are life-threatening and
require comprehensive care and constant monitoring. It is
usually administered in specially equipped units of a health
care facility.

Interferon

Интерферон

A biological response modifier (a substance that can improve
the body's natural response to disease). Interferons interfere
with the division of cancer cells and can slow tumor growth.
There are several types of interferons, including interferonalpha, -beta, and - gamma. These substances are normally
produced by the body. They are also made in the laboratory
for use in treating cancer and other diseases.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Interferon-alpha

Интерферон-альфа

One of the type I interferons produced by peripheral blood
leukocytes or lymphoblastoid cells when exposed to live or
inactivated virus, double-stranded RNA, or bacterial products.
It is the major interferon produced by virus-induced leukocyte
cultures and, in addition to its pronounced antiviral activity,
it causes activation of NK cells.

Interleukin-2

Интерлейкин-2

Chemical mediator produced by activated T lymphocytes and
which regulates the proliferation of T cells, as well as playing
a role in the regulation of NK cell activity.

Internal radiation

Внутреннее облучение

A procedure in which radioactive material sealed in needles,
seeds, wires, or catheters is placed directly into or near the
tumor. Also called brachytherapy, implant radiation, or
interstitial radiation therapy.

Interstitial

Интерстициальный

Pertaining to or situated between parts or in the interspaces of
a tissue.

Intestinal

Кишечный

Having to do with the intestines.

Intestinal mucosa

Слизистая оболочка
кишечника

The surface lining of the intestines, where the cells absorb
nutrients.

Intestine

Кишка, кишечник; (~s)
кишечный тракт

A long, tube-shaped organ in the abdomen that completes the
process of digestion. There is both a large intestine and a small
intestine. Also called the bowel.

Intracellular

Внутриклеточный

Inside a cell.

Intracellular
membranes

Внутриклеточные
мембраны

Membranes of subcellular structures.

Intraepithelial

Интраэпителиальной

Within the layer of cells that form the surface or lining of an
organ.

Intramuscular

Внутримышечный

IM. Within or into muscle.

Intramuscular injection

Внутримышечная инъекция

IM. Injection into a muscle.

Intravascular

Внутрисосудистый

Within a vessel or vessels.

Invasive

Инвазивный

1. Having the quality of invasiveness. 2. Involving puncture or
incision of the skin or insertion of an instrument or foreign
material into the body; said of diagnostic techniques.

Ion channels

Ионные каналы

Gated, ion-selective glycoproteins that traverse membranes.
The stimulus for channel gating can be a membrane potential,
drug, transmitter, cytoplasmic messenger, or a mechanical
deformation. Ion channels which are integral parts of
ionotropic neurotransmitter receptors are not included.

Ions

Ионы

An atom or group of atoms that have a positive or negative
electric charge due to a gain (negative charge) or loss (positive
charge) of one or more electrons. Atoms with a positive charge
are known as cations; those with a negative charge are anions.

Irradiation

Иррадиация, облучение

The use of high-energy radiation from x-rays, neutrons, and
other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. Radiation
may come from a machine outside the body (external-beam
radiation therapy) or from materials called radioisotopes.
Radioisotopes produce radiation and can be placed in or near

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

the tumor or in the area near cancer cells. This type of
radiation treatment is called internal radiation therapy,
implant radiation, interstitial radiation, or brachytherapy.
Systemic radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance, such
as a radiolabeled monoclonal antibody, which circulates
throughout the body. Irradiation is also called radiation
therapy, radiotherapy, and x-ray therapy.
Irritants

Раздражители

Drugs that act locally on cutaneous or mucosal surfaces to
produce inflammation; those that cause redness due to
hyperemia are rubefacients; those that raise blisters are
vesicants and those that penetrate sebaceous glands and cause
abscesses are pustulants; tear gases and mustard gases are also
irritants.

Kb

Килобаза, кб

A measure of the length of DNA fragments, 1 Kb = 1000 base
pairs. The largest DNA fragments are up to 50 kilobases long.

Kinetics

Кинетика

The study of rate dynamics in chemical or physical systems.

Labile

1. Лабильный;
2. Неустойчивый

1. Gliding; moving from point to point over the surface;
unstable; fluctuating. 2. Chemically unstable.

Large intestine

Толстая кишка, толстый
кишечник

The part of the intestine that goes from the cecum to the
rectum. The large intestine absorbs water from stool and
changes it from a liquid to a solid form. The large intestine is
5 feet long and includes the appendix, cecum, colon, and
rectum. Also called colon.

Lectin

Лектин

A complex molecule that has both protein and sugars. Lectins
are able to bind to the outside of a cell and cause biochemical
changes in it. Lectins are made by both animals and plants.

Lesion

Очаг поражения,
патологическое изменение

An area of abnormal tissue change.

Lethal

Летальный

Deadly, fatal.

Lethargy

Летаргия

Abnormal drowsiness or stupor; a condition of indifference.

Leukemia

Лейкемия

Cancer of blood-forming tissue.

Lipid

Липид

Fat.

Lipopolysaccharide

Липополисахарид

Substance consisting of polysaccharide and lipid.

Lipoprotein

Липопротеин, липопротеид

Any of the lipid-protein complexes in which lipids are
transported in the blood; lipoprotein particles consist of a
spherical hydrophobic core of triglycerides or cholesterol
esters surrounded by an amphipathic monolayer of
phospholipids, cholesterol, and apolipoproteins; the four
principal classes are high-density, low-density, and very-lowdensity lipoproteins and chylomicrons.

Liver

Печень

A large, glandular organ located in the upper abdomen. The
liver cleanses the blood and aids in digestion by secreting bile.

Localization

Локализация

The process of determining or marking the location or site of
a lesion or disease. May also refer to the process of keeping a
lesion or disease in a specific location or site.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Localized

Локализованный

Cancer which has not metastasized yet.

Locomotion

Локомоция

Movement or the ability to move from one place or another. It
can refer to humans, vertebrate or invertebrate animals, and
microorganisms.

Loop

Петля

A wire usually of platinum bent at one end into a small loop
(usually 4 mm inside diameter) and used in transferring
microorganisms.

Low-density
lipoprotein

Липопротеин низкой
плотности

Lipoprotein that contains most of the cholesterol in the blood.
LDL carries cholesterol to the tissues of the body, including
the arteries. A high level of LDL increases the risk of heart
disease. LDL typically contains 60 to 70 percent of the total
serum cholesterol and both are directly correlated with CHD
risk.

Lymph

Лимфа

The almost colorless fluid that travels through the lymphatic
system and carries cells that help fight infection and disease.

Lymph node

Лимфатический узел

A rounded mass of lymphatic tissue that is surrounded by a
capsule of connective tissue. Also known as a lymph gland.
Lymph nodes are spread out along lymphatic vessels and
contain many lymphocytes, which filter the lymphatic fluid
(lymph).

Lymphadenopathy

Лимфаденопатия

Disease or swelling of the lymph nodes.

Lymphatic

Лимфатический

The tissues and organs, including the bone marrow, spleen,
thymus, and lymph nodes, which produce and store cells that
fight infection and disease.

Lymphatic system

Лимфатическая система

The tissues and organs that produce, store, and carry white
blood cells that fight infection and other diseases. This system
includes the bone marrow, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes and
a network of thin tubes that carry lymph and white blood cells.
These tubes branch, like blood vessels, into all the tissues of
the body.

Lymphocytes

Лимфоциты

White blood cells formed in the body's lymphoid tissue. The
nucleus is round or ovoid with coarse, irregularly clumped
chromatin while the cytoplasm is typically pale blue with
azurophilic (if any) granules. Most lymphocytes can be
classified as either T or B (with subpopulations of each); those
with characteristics of neither major class are called null cells.

Lymphoid

Лимфатический

Referring to lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. Also
refers to tissue in which lymphocytes develop.

Lymphopenia

Лимфопения

Reduction in the number of lymphocytes.

Lysine

Лизин, лиз

An essential amino acid. It is often added to animal feed.

Lytic

Литический

1. Pertaining to lysis or to a lysin. 2. Producing lysis.

Macrophage

Макрофаг

A type of white blood cell that surrounds and kills
microorganisms, removes dead cells, and stimulates the action
of other immune system cells.

Major
histocompatibility
complex

Главный комплекс
гистосовместимости, ГКГ

The genetic region which contains the loci of genes which
determine the structure of the serologically defined (SD) and
lymphocyte-defined (LD) transplantation antigens, genes
which control the structure of the immune response-

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

associated (Ia) antigens, the immune response (Ir) genes
which control the ability of an animal to respond
immunologically to antigenic stimuli, and genes which
determine the structure and/ or level of the first four
components of complement.
Malabsorption

Малабсорбция,
расстройство всасывания

Impaired intestinal absorption of nutrients.

Malignancy

Злокачественность

A cancerous tumor that can invade and destroy nearby tissue
and spread to other parts of the body.

Malignant

Злокачественный

Cancerous; a growth with a tendency to invade and destroy
nearby tissue and spread to other parts of the body.

Malignant tumor

Злокачественная опухоль

A tumor capable of metastasizing.

Mediate

Медиировать

Indirect; accomplished by the aid of an intervening medium.

Mediator

Нейромедиатор, медиатор;
Переносчик

An object or substance by which something is mediated, such
as (1) a structure of the nervous system that transmits impulses
eliciting a specific response; (2) a chemical substance
(transmitter substance) that induces activity in an excitable
tissue, such as nerve or muscle; or (3) a substance released
from cells as the result of the interaction of antigen with
antibody or by the action of antigen with a sensitized
lymphocyte.

Medline

Медицинская база данных
«Медлайн»

An online database of MEDLARS, the computerized
bibliographic Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval
System of the National Library of Medicine.

Meiosis

Мейоз, редукционное
деление

A special method of cell division, occurring in maturation of
the germ cells, by means of which each daughter nucleus
receives half the number of chromosomes characteristic of the
somatic cells of the species.

Melanin

Меланин

The substance that gives the skin its color.

Membrane

Мембрана

A very thin layer of tissue that covers a surface.

Membrane fusion

Мембранный синтез

The adherence of cell membranes, intracellular membranes,
or artificial membrane models of either to each other or to
viruses, parasites, or interstitial particles through a variety of
chemical and physical processes.

Membrane proteins

Мембранные белки

Proteins which are found in membranes including cellular and
intracellular membranes. They consist of two types, peripheral
and integral proteins. They include most membraneassociated enzymes, antigenic proteins, transport proteins,
and drug, hormone, and lectin receptors.

Memory

Память

Complex mental function having four distinct phases: (1)
memorizing or learning, (2) retention, (3) recall, and (4)
recognition. Clinically, it is usually subdivided into
immediate, recent, and remote memory.

Meningeal

Менингеальный

Refers to the meninges, the tissue covering the brain and
spinal cord.

Meninges

Оболочки головного мозга

The three membranes that cover and protect the brain and
spinal cord.

Mental

Психический, умственный

Pertaining to the mind; psychic. 2. (L. mentum chin)
pertaining to the chin.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Mental health

Психическое здоровье

The state wherein the person is well adjusted.

Microbe

Микроб

An organism which cannot be observed with the naked eye;
e.g., unicellular animals, lower algae, lower fungi, bacteria.

Microbiology

Микробиология

The study of microorganisms such as fungi, bacteria, algae,
archaea, and viruses.

Microglia

Микроглия

The third type of glial cell, along with astrocytes and
oligodendrocytes (which together form the macroglia).
Microglia vary in appearance depending on developmental
stage, functional state, and anatomical location; subtype terms
include ramified, perivascular, ameboid, resting, and
activated. Microglia clearly are capable of phagocytosis and
play an important role in a wide spectrum of
neuropathologies. They have also been suggested to act in
several other roles including in secretion (e.g., of cytokines
and neural growth factors), in immunological processing (e.g.,
antigen presentation), and in central nervous system
development and remodeling.

Microorganism

Микроорганизм

An organism that can be seen only through a microscope.
Microorganisms include bacteria, protozoa, algae, and fungi.
Although viruses are not considered living organisms, they are
sometimes classified as microorganisms.

Microscopy

Микроскопия

The application of microscope magnification to the study of
materials that cannot be properly seen by the unaided eye.

Migration

Миграция

The systematic movement of genes between populations of
the same species, geographic race, or variety.

Mineralocorticoids

Минералокортикоиды

A group of corticosteroids primarily associated with the
regulation of water and electrolyte balance. This is
accomplished through the effect on ion transport in renal
tubules, resulting in retention of sodium and loss of
potassium. Mineralocorticoid secretion is itself regulated by
plasma volume, serum potassium, and angiotensin II.

Mitosis

Митоз

A method of indirect cell division by means of which the two
daughter nuclei normally receive identical complements of
the number of chromosomes of the somatic cells of the
species.

Modelling

Моделирование

A treatment procedure whereby the therapist presents the
target behavior which the learner is to imitate and make part
of his repertoire.

Modification

Модификация

A change in an organism, or in a process in an organism, which
is acquired from its own activity or environment.

Molecular

Молекулярный

Of, pertaining to, or composed of molecules: a very small mass
of matter.

Molecule

Молекула

A chemical made up of two or more atoms. The atoms in a
molecule can be the same (an oxygen molecule has two oxygen
atoms) or different (a water molecule has two hydrogen atoms
and one oxygen atom). Biological molecules, such as proteins
and DNA, can be made up of many thousands of atoms.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Monitor

Монитор

An apparatus which automatically records such physiological
signs as respiration, pulse, and blood pressure in an
anesthetized patient or one undergoing surgical or other
procedures.

Monoclonal

Моноклональный

An antibody produced by culturing a single type of cell. It
therefore consists of a single species of immunoglobulin
molecules.

Monoclonal antibodies

Моноклональные антитела

Laboratory-produced substances that can locate and bind to
cancer cells wherever they are in the body. Many monoclonal
antibodies are used in cancer detection or therapy; each one
recognizes a different protein on certain cancer cells.
Monoclonal antibodies can be used alone, or they can be used
to deliver drugs, toxins, or radioactive material directly to a
tumor.

Monocyte

Моноциты

A type of white blood cell.

Mononuclear

Мононуклеарный

A cell with one nucleus.

Morphological

Морфологический

Relating to the configuration or the structure of live organs.

Mucins

Муцины

A secretion containing mucopolysaccharides and protein that
is the chief constituent of mucus.

Mucosa

Слизистая оболочка

A mucous membrane, or tunica mucosa.

Mucus

Слизь

The viscous secretion of mucous membranes. It contains
mucin, white blood cells, water, inorganic salts, and exfoliated
cells.

Multiple sclerosis

Рассеянный склероз

A disorder of the central nervous system marked by weakness,
numbness, a loss of muscle coordination, and problems with
vision, speech, and bladder control. Multiple sclerosis is
thought to be an autoimmune disease in which the body's
immune system destroys myelin. Myelin is a substance that
contains both protein and fat (lipid) and serves as a nerve
insulator and helps in the transmission of nerve signals.

Multivalent

Поливалентный

Pertaining to a group of 5 or more homologous or partly
homologous chromosomes during the zygotene stage of
prophase to first metaphasis in meiosis.

Mutagenesis

Мутагенез

Process of generating genetic mutations. It may occur
spontaneously or be induced by mutagens.

Mutagens

Мутагены

Chemical agents that increase the rate of genetic mutation by
interfering with the function of nucleic acids. A clastogen is a
specific mutagen that causes breaks in chromosomes.

Myalgia

Миалгия

Pain in a muscle or muscles.

Myelin

Миелин

The fatty substance that covers and protects nerves.

Myelin sheath

Миелиновая оболочка

The lipid-rich sheath investing many axons in both the central
and peripheral nervous systems. The myelin sheath is an
electrical insulator and allows faster and more energetically
efficient conduction of impulses. The sheath is formed by the
cell membranes of glial cells (Schwann cells in the peripheral
and oligodendroglia in the central nervous system).
Deterioration of the sheath in demyelinating diseases is a
serious clinical problem.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Nasal mucosa

Слизистая оболочка носа

The mucous membrane lining the nasal cavity.

Nasopharynx

Носоглотка

The nasal part of the pharynx, lying above the level of the soft
palate.

Nausea

Тошнота

An unpleasant sensation in the stomach usually accompanied
by the urge to vomit. Common causes are early pregnancy, sea
and motion sickness, emotional stress, intense pain, food
poisoning, and various enteroviruses.

NCI

Национальный институт
онкологии США

National Cancer Institute. NCI, part of the National Institutes
of Health of the United States Department of Health and
Human Services, is the federal government's principal agency
for cancer research. NCI conducts, coordinates, and funds
cancer research, training, health information dissemination,
and other programs with respect to the cause, diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of cancer. Access the NCI Web site
at http://cancer.gov.

Necrosis

Некроз

A pathological process caused by the progressive degradative
action of enzymes that is generally associated with severe
cellular trauma. It is characterized by mitochondrial swelling,
nuclear flocculation, uncontrolled cell lysis, and ultimately
cell death.

Necrotizing
enterocolitis

Некротический
энтероколит

A condition in which part of the tissue in the intestines is
destroyed. Occurs mainly in under-weight new-born babies. A
temporary ileostomy may be necessary.

Neonatal

Неонатальный

Pertaining to the first four weeks after birth.

Neoplasms

Новообразования, опухоли,
неоплазмы

New abnormal growth of tissue. Malignant neoplasms show a
greater degree of anaplasia and have the properties of invasion
and metastasis, compared to benign neoplasms.

Nephritis

Нефрит

Inflammation of the kidney; a focal or diffuse proliferative or
destructive process which may involve the glomerulus, tubule,
or interstitial renal tissue.

Nephropathy

Нефропатия

Disease of the kidneys.

Nervous system

Нервная система

The entire nerve apparatus composed of the brain, spinal cord,
nerves, and ganglia.

Neural

1. Нервный; 2. Нейронный

1. Pertaining to a nerve or to the nerves. 2. Situated in the
region of the spinal axis, as the neutral arch.

Neurodegenerative
diseases

Нейродегенеративные
заболевания

Hereditary and sporadic conditions which are characterized
by progressive nervous system dysfunction. These disorders
are often associated with atrophy of the affected central or
peripheral nervous system structures.

Neurologic

Неврологический

Having to do with nerves or the nervous system.

Neuronal

Нейронный, нейрональный

Pertaining to a neuron or neurons (=conducting cells of the
nervous system).

Neurons

Нейроны

The basic cellular units of nervous tissue. Each neuron consists
of a body, an axon, and dendrites. Their purpose is to receive,
conduct, and transmit impulses in the nervous system.

Neurotransmitter

Трансмиттер

Any of a group of substances that are released on excitation
from the axon terminal of a presynaptic neuron of the central
or peripheral nervous system and travel across the synaptic

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

cleft to either excite or inhibit the target cell. Among the many
substances that have the properties of a neurotransmitter are
acetylcholine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine,
glycine, y-aminobutyrate, glutamic acid, substance P,
enkephalins, endorphins, and serotonin.
Neutralization

Нейтрализация

An act or process of neutralizing.

Neutrons

Нейтроны

Electrically neutral elementary particles found in all atomic
nuclei except light hydrogen; the mass is equal to that of the
proton and electron combined and they are unstable when
isolated from the nucleus, undergoing beta decay. Slow,
thermal, epithermal, and fast neutrons refer to the energy
levels with which the neutrons are ejected from heavier nuclei
during their decay.

Neutrophils

Нейтрофилы; содержание
нейтрофилов

Granular leukocytes having a nucleus with three to five lobes
connected by slender threads of chromatin, and cytoplasm
containing fine inconspicuous granules and stainable by
neutral dyes.

Nitric oxide

Окись азота, NO

A free radical gas produced endogenously by a variety of
mammalian cells. It is synthesized from arginine by a complex
reaction, catalyzed by nitric oxide synthase. Nitric oxide is
endothelium-derived relaxing factor. It is released by the
vascular endothelium and mediates the relaxation induced by
some vasodilators such as acetylcholine and bradykinin. It also
inhibits platelet aggregation, induces disaggregation of
aggregated platelets, and inhibits platelet adhesion to the
vascular endothelium. Nitric oxide activates cytosolic
guanylate cyclase and thus elevates intracellular levels of
cyclic GMP.

Nitrogen

Азот

An element with the atomic symbol N, atomic number 7, and
atomic weight 14. Nitrogen exists as a diatomic gas and makes
up about 78% of the earth's atmosphere by volume. It is a
constituent of proteins and nucleic acids and found in all
living cells.

Nosocomial

Нозокомиальный

Pertaining to or originating in the hospital, said of an infection
not present or incubating prior to admittance to the hospital,
but generally occurring 72 hours after admittance; the term is
usually used to refer to patient disease, but hospital personnel
may also acquire nosocomial infection.

Nuclear

Нуклеарный, ядерный

A test of the structure, blood flow, and function of the kidneys.
The doctor injects a mildly radioactive solution into an arm
vein and uses x-rays to monitor its progress through the
kidneys.

Nuclei

Ядра

A body of specialized protoplasm found in nearly all cells and
containing the chromosomes.

Nucleic acid

Нуклеиновая кислота

Either of two types of macromolecule (DNA or RNA) formed
by polymerization of nucleotides. Nucleic acids are found in
all living cells and contain the information (genetic code) for
the transfer of genetic information from one generation to the
next.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Nucleic acid
hybridization

Гибридизация
нуклеиновых кислот

The process whereby two single-stranded polynucleotides
form a double-stranded molecule, with hydrogen bonding
between the complementary bases in the two strains.

Nucleocapsid

Нуклеокапсид

A protein-nucleic acid complex which forms part or all of a
virion. It consists of a capsid plus enclosed nucleic acid.
Depending on the virus, the nucleocapsid may correspond to
a naked core or be surrounded by a membranous envelope.

Nucleocapsid proteins

Нуклеокапсидные белки

Viral proteins found in either the nucleocapsid or the viral
core (viral core proteins).

Nucleus

Клеточное ядро

A body of specialized protoplasm found in nearly all cells and
containing the chromosomes.

Octamer

Октамер

Eight molecules of histone.

Ocular

Окуляр; окулярный

1. Of, pertaining to, or affecting the eye. 2. Eyepiece.

Oesophagus

Пищевод; пищеводный

The muscular tube through which food passes from the throat
to the stomach.

Ointments

Мази

Semisolid preparations used topically for protective emollient
effects or as a vehicle for local administration of medications.
Ointment bases are various mixtures of fats, waxes, animal
and plant oils and solid and liquid hydrocarbons.

Oligodendroglia

Олигодендроглия

A class of neuroglial (macroglial) cells in the central nervous
system. Oligodendroglia may be called interfascicular,
perivascular, or perineuronal satellite cells according to their
location. The most important recognized function of these
cells is the formation of the insulating myelin sheaths of axons
in the central nervous system.

Oligosaccharides

Олигосахариды

Carbohydrates consisting of between two and ten
monosaccharides connected by either an alpha- or betaglycosidic link. They are found throughout nature in both the
free and bound form.

Open reading frames

Открытая рамка
считывания

Reading frames where successive nucleotide triplets can be
read as codons specifying amino acids and where the sequence
of these triplets is not interrupted by stop codons.

Ophthalmology

Офтальмология

A surgical specialty concerned with the structure and function
of the eye and the medical and surgical treatment of its defects
and diseases.

Organ culture

Органная культура,
культура органа

The growth in aseptic culture of plant organs such as roots or
shoots, beginning with organ primordia or segments and
maintaining the characteristics of the organ.

Otitis

Отит

Inflammation of the ear, which may be marked by pain, fever,
abnormalities of hearing, hearing loss, tinnitus, and vertigo.

Otitis media

Отит среднего уха

Inflammation of the middle ear.

Otitis media with
effusion

Средний отит с выпотом

Inflammation of the middle ear with a clear pale yellowcolored transudate.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Ovary

Яичник

Either of the paired glands in the female that produce the
female germ cells and secrete some of the female sex
hormones.

Pediatric

Педиатрический

Of or relating to the care and medical treatment of children;
belonging to or concerned with pediatrics.

Palate

Нёбо

The structure that forms the roof of the mouth. It consists of
the anterior hard palate and the posterior soft palate.

Palliative

1. Паллиативный;
2. Паллиатив

1. Affording relief, but not cure. 2. An alleviating medicine.

Pancreas

Поджелудочная железа

A mixed exocrine and endocrine gland situated transversely
across the posterior abdominal wall in the epigastric and
hypochondriac regions. The endocrine portion is comprised of
the Islets of Langerhans, while the exocrine portion is a
compound acinar gland that secretes digestive enzymes.

Pancreatic

Панкреатит

Having to do with the pancreas.

Pancreatic juice

Панкреатический/
поджелудочный сок

The fluid containing digestive enzymes secreted by the
pancreas in response to food in the duodenum.

Paneth cells

Панетовские клетки,
клетки Панета

Epithelial cells found in the basal part of the intestinal glands
(crypts of Lieberkuhn). Paneth cells synthesize and secrete
lysozyme and cryptdins.

Papain

Папаин

A proteolytic enzyme obtained from Carica papaya. It is also
the name used for a purified mixture of papain and
chymopapain that is used as a topical enzymatic debriding
agent. EC 3.4.22.2.

Papillomavirus

Папилломавирус

A genus of Papovaviridae causing proliferation of the
epithelium, which may lead to malignancy. A wide range of
animals are infected including humans, chimpanzees, cattle,
rabbits, dogs, and horses.

Paraffin

Парафиновый; парафин

A mixture of solid hydrocarbons obtained from petroleum. It
has a wide range of uses including as a stiffening agent in
ointments, as a lubricant, and as a topical anti-inflammatory.
It is also commonly used as an embedding material in
histology.

Paralysis

Паралич

Loss of ability to move all or part of the body.

Parasitic

Паразитический, паразит

Having to do with or being a parasite. A parasite is an animal
or a plant that lives on or in an organism of another species
and gets at least some of its nutrients from it.

Particle

Частица

A tiny mass of material.

Pathogen

Патоген

Any disease-producing microorganism.

Pathologic

Патологический

1. Indicative of or caused by a morbid condition. 2. Pertaining
to pathology (= branch of medicine that treats the essential
nature of the disease, especially the structural and functional
changes in tissues and organs of the body caused by the
disease).

Pathologic processes

Патологические процессы

The abnormal mechanisms and forms involved in the
dysfunctions of tissues and organs.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Peptide

Пептид

Any compound consisting of two or more amino acids, the
building blocks of proteins. Peptides are combined to make
proteins.

Peptide T

Пептид Т

N-(N-(N(2)-(N-(N-(N-(N-D-Alanyl
L-seryl)-L-threonyl)-Lthreonyl) L-threonyl)- L-asparaginyl)-L-tyrosyl) L-threonine.
Octapeptide sharing sequence homology with HIV envelope
protein gp120. It is potentially useful as antiviral agent in AIDS
therapy. The core pentapeptide sequence, TTNYT, consisting
of amino acids 4-8 in peptide T, is the HIV envelope sequence
required for attachment to the CD4 receptor.

Peripheral blood

Периферическая нервная
система

Blood circulating throughout the body.

Peripheral nervous
system

Периферическая нервная
система (ПНС)

The nervous system outside of the brain and spinal cord. The
peripheral nervous system has autonomic and somatic
divisions. The autonomic nervous system includes the enteric,
parasympathetic, and sympathetic subdivisions. The somatic
nervous system includes the cranial and spinal nerves and
their ganglia and the peripheral sensory receptors.

Peritoneal

Перитонеальный

Having to do with the peritoneum (the tissue that lines the
abdominal wall and covers most of the organs in the
abdomen).

Peritoneum

Брюшной, перитонеальый
(~полость)

Endothelial lining of the abdominal cavity, the parietal
peritoneum covering the inside of the abdominal wall and the
visceral peritoneum covering the bowel, the mesentery, and
certain of the organs. The portion that covers the bowel
becomes the serosal layer of the bowel wall.

Peritonitis

Перитонит

Inflammation of the peritoneum; a condition marked by
exudations in the peritoneum of serum, fibrin, cells, and pus.
It is attended by abdominal pain and tenderness, constipation,
vomiting, and moderate fever.

Perivascular

Периваскулярный

Situated around a vessel.

Petroleum

Нефтяной

Naturally occurring complex liquid hydrocarbons which, after
distillation, yield combustible fuels, petrochemicals, and
lubricants.

Phallic

Фаллический

Pertaining to the phallus, or penis.

Pharmaceutical
preparations

Фармацевтические
препараты

Drugs intended for human or veterinary use, presented in
their finished dosage form. Included here are materials used
in the preparation and/or formulation of the finished dosage
form.

Pharmacokinetics

Фармакокинетика;
фармакокинетические
свойства

Dynamic and kinetic mechanisms of exogenous chemical and
drug absorption, biotransformation, distribution, release,
transport, uptake, and elimination as a function of dosage, and
extent and rate of metabolic processes. It includes
toxicokinetics, the pharmacokinetic mechanism of the toxic
effects of a substance.

Pharmacologic

Фармакологический

Pertaining to pharmacology or to the properties and reactions
of drugs.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Pharynx

Глотка

The hollow tube about 5 inches long that starts behind the
nose and ends at the top of the trachea (windpipe) and
oesophagus (the tube that goes to the stomach).

Phenotype

Фенотип

The outward appearance of the individual. It is the product of
interactions between genes and between the genotype and the
environment. This includes the killer phenotype,
characteristic of yeasts.

Phenylalanine

Фенилаланин, фен

An aromatic amino acid that is essential in the animal diet. It
is a precursor of melanin, dopamine, noradrenalin, and
thyroxine.

Phospholipases

Фосфолипазы

A class of enzymes that catalyze the hydrolysis of
phosphoglycerides or glycerophosphatidates. EC 3.1.

Phospholipids

Фосфолипиды, фосфатиды

Lipids containing one or more phosphate groups, particularly
those derived from either glycerol (phosphoglycerides;
glycerophospholipids) or sphingosine (sphingolipids). They
are polar lipids that are of great importance for the structure
and function of cell membranes and are the most abundant of
membrane lipids, although not stored in large amounts in the
system.

Phosphorus

Фосфор

A non-metallic element that is found in the blood, muscles,
nerves, bones, and teeth, and is a component of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP; the primary energy source for the body's
cells.)

Phosphorylated

Фосфорилированный

Attached to a phosphate group.

Phosphorylation

Фосфорилирование

The introduction of a phosphoryl group into a compound
through the formation of an ester bond between the
compound and a phosphorus moiety.

Photocoagulation

Фотокоагуляция

Using a special strong beam of light (laser) to seal off bleeding
blood vessels such as in the eye. The laser can also burn away
blood vessels that should not have grown in the eye. This is
the main treatment for diabetic retinopathy.

Phylogeny

Филогения, филогенез

The relationships of groups of organisms as reflected by their
evolutionary history.

Physiologic

Физиологический

Having to do with the functions of the body. When used in the
phrase “physiologic age”, it refers to an age assigned by general
health, as opposed to calendar age.

Physiology

Физиологические признаки

The science that deals with the life processes and functions of
organismus, their cells, tissues, and organs.

Picornavirus

Пикорнавирус

Any of a group of tiny RNA-containing viruses including the
enteroviruses and rhinoviruses.

Pituitary gland

Гипофиз

A small, unpaired gland situated in the sella turcica tissue. It
is connected to the hypothalamus by a short stalk.

Plants

Растения

Multicellular, eukaryotic life forms of the kingdom Plantae.
They are characterized by a mainly photosynthetic mode of
nutrition; essentially unlimited growth at localized regions of
cell divisions (meristems); cellulose within cells providing

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

rigidity; the absence of organs of locomotion; absence of
nervous and sensory systems; and an alteration of haploid and
diploid generations.
Plaque

«Бляшка»

A clear zone in a bacterial culture grown on an agar plate
caused by localized destruction of bacterial cells by a
bacteriophage. The concentration of infective virus in a fluid
can be estimated by applying the fluid to a culture and
counting the number of.

Plaque assay

Анализ бляшкообразования

Method for measuring viral infectivity and multiplication in
cultured cells. Clear lysed areas or plaques develop as the viral
particles are released from the infected cells during
incubation. With some viruses, the cells are killed by a
cytopathic effect; with others, the infected cells are not killed
but can be detected by their hemadsorptive ability. Sometimes
the plaque cells contain viral antigens which can be measured
by immunofluorescence.

Plasma

Плазма

The clear, yellowish, fluid part of the blood that carries the
blood cells. The proteins that form blood clots are in plasma.

Plasma cells

Плазматические клетки

A type of white blood cell that produces antibodies.

Plasmid

Плазмида

An autonomously replicating, extra-chromosomal DNA
molecule found in many bacteria. Plasmids are widely used as
carriers of cloned genes.

Platelet activation

Активация тромбоцитов

A series of progressive, overlapping events triggered by
exposure of the platelets to subendothelial tissue. These
events include shape change, adhesiveness, aggregation, and
release reactions. When carried through to completion, these
events lead to the formation of a stable hemostatic plug.

Platelet aggregation

Агрегация тромбоцитов

The attachment of platelets to one another. This clumping
together can be induced by a number of agents (e.g.,
thrombin, collagen) and is part of the mechanism leading to
the formation of a thrombus.

Platelets

Тромбоциты

A type of blood cell that helps prevent bleeding by causing
blood clots to form. Also called thrombocytes.

Pneumonia

Пневмония

Inflammation of the lungs.

Poisoning

Отравление

A condition or physical state produced by the ingestion,
injection or inhalation of, or exposure to a deleterious agent.

Polymerase

Полимераза

An enzyme which catalyzes the synthesis of DNA using a
single DNA strand as a template. The polymerase copies the
template in the 5'-3'direction provided that sufficient
quantities of free nucleotides, dATP and dTTP are present.

Polymerase chain
reaction

Полимеразная цепная
реакция (ПЦР)

In vitro method for producing large amounts of specific DNA
or RNA fragments of defined length and sequence from small
amounts of short oligonucleotide flanking sequences
(primers). The essential steps include thermal denaturation of
the double-stranded target molecules, annealing of the
primers to their complementary sequences, and extension of
the annealed primers by enzymatic synthesis with DNA

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

polymerase. The reaction is efficient, specific, and extremely
sensitive. Uses for the reaction include disease diagnosis,
detection of difficult-to-isolate pathogens, mutation analysis,
genetic testing, DNA sequencing, and analyzing evolutionary
relationships.
Polymorphism

Полиморфизм

The occurrence together of two or more distinct forms in the
same population.

Polypeptide

Полипептид

A peptide which on hydrolysis yields more than two amino
acids; called tripeptides, tetrapeptides, etc. according to the
number of amino acids contained.

Polyproteins

Полипротеины

Proteins which are synthesized as a single polymer and then
cleaved into several distinct proteins.

Polysaccharide

Полисахарид

A type of carbohydrate. It contains sugar molecules that are
linked together chemically.

Postsynaptic

Постсинаптический

Nerve potential generated by an inhibitory hyperpolarizing
stimulation.

Potassium

Калий

An element that is in the alkali group of metals. It has an
atomic symbol K, atomic number 19, and atomic weight 39.10.
It is the chief cation in the intracellular fluid of muscle and
other cells. Potassium ion is a strong electrolyte and it plays a
significant role in the regulation of fluid volume and
maintenance of the water-electrolyte balance.

Potentiation

Потенцирование

An overall effect of two drugs taken together which is greater
than the sum of the effects of each drug taken alone.

Practice guidelines

Практические
рекомендации

Directions or principles presenting current or future rules of
policy for the health care practitioner to assist him in patient
care decisions regarding diagnosis, therapy, or related clinical
circumstances. The guidelines may be developed by
government agencies at any level, institutions, professional
societies, governing boards, or by the convening of expert
panels. The guidelines form a basis for the evaluation of all
aspects of health care and delivery.

Precursor

Предшественник

Something that precedes. In biological processes, a substance
from which another, usually more active or mature substance
is formed. In clinical medicine, a sign or symptom that heralds
another.

Prednisolone

Преднизолон

A glucocorticoid with the general properties of the
corticosteroids. It is the drug of choice for all conditions in
which routine systemic corticosteroid therapy is indicated,
except adrenal deficiency states.

Prednisone

Преднизон

A synthetic anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid derived from
cortisone. It is biologically inert and converted to
prednisolone in the liver.

Probe

Зонд

An instrument used in exploring cavities, or in the detection
and dilatation of strictures, or in demonstrating the potency
of channels; an elongated instrument for exploring or
sounding body cavities.

www.transcendwithwords.com
Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Progeny

Потомство

The offspring produced in any generation.

Progression

Прогрессирование,
развитие

Increase in the size of a tumor or spread of cancer in the body.

Progressive

Прогрессирующий

Advancing; going forward; going from bad to worse;
increasing in scope or severity.

Promoter

Промотор

A chemical substance that increases the activity of a
carcinogenic process.

Prophase

Профаза

The first phase of cell division, in which the chromosomes
become visible, the nucleus starts to lose its identity, the
spindle appears, and the centrioles migrate toward opposite
poles.

Prophylaxis

Профилактика

An attempt to prevent disease.

Prospective study

Проспективное
исследование

An epidemiologic study in which a group of individuals (a
cohort), all free of a particular disease and varying in their
exposure to a possible risk factor, is followed over a specific
amount of time to determine the incidence rates of the disease
in the exposed and unexposed groups.

Protease

Протеолитический
фермент, протеаза

Proteinase (= any enzyme that catalyzes the splitting of
interior peptide bonds in a protein).

Protein C

Белок, протеин С

A vitamin-K dependent zymogen present in the blood, which,
upon activation by thrombin and thrombomodulin exerts
anticoagulant properties by inactivating factors Va and VIIIa
at the rate-limiting steps of thrombin formation.

Protein S

Белок, протеин S

The vitamin K-dependent cofactor of activated protein C.
Together with protein C, it inhibits the action of factors VIIIa
and Va. A deficiency in protein S can lead to recurrent venous
and arterial thrombosis.

Proteins

Белки, протеины

Polymers of amino acids linked by peptide bonds. The specific
sequence of amino acids determines the shape and function of
the protein.

Proteolytic

Протеолитический

1. Pertaining to, characterized by, or promoting proteolysis. 2.
An enzyme that promotes proteolysis (= the splitting of
proteins by hydrolysis of the peptide bonds with formation of
smaller polypeptides).

Proteome

Протеом

The protein complement of an organism coded for by its
genome.

Protozoa

Протозоа

A subkingdom consisting of unicellular organisms that are the
simplest in the animal kingdom. Most are free living. They
range in size from submicroscopic to macroscopic. Protozoa
are divided into seven phyla: Sarcomastigophora,
Labyrinthomorpha, Apicomplexa, Microspora, Ascetospora,
Myxozoa, and Ciliophora.

Proximal

Проксимальный

Nearest; closer to any point of reference; opposed to distal.

Psychiatry

Психиатрия

The medical science that deals with the origin, diagnosis,
prevention, and treatment of mental disorders.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Public health

Общественное здоровье,
здравоохранение, охрана
здоровья населения

Branch of medicine concerned with the prevention and
control of disease and disability, and the promotion of
physical and mental health of the population on the
international, national, state, or municipal level.

Public policy

Курс государственной
политики, общественногосударственная политика

A course or method of action selected, usually by a
government, from among alternatives to guide and determine
present and future decisions.

Publishing

Издательский, печатный

"The business or profession of the commercial production and
issuance of literature" (Webster's 3d). It includes the
publisher, publication processes, editing and editors.
Production may be by conventional printing methods or by
electronic publishing.

Pulmonary

Легочный

Relating to the lungs.

Pulse

Пульс

The rhythmical expansion and contraction of an artery
produced by waves of pressure caused by the ejection of blood
from the left ventricle of the heart as it contracts.

Purifying

Очистительный

Respiratory equipment whose function is to remove
contaminants from otherwise wholesome air.

Purines

Пурины

A series of heterocyclic compounds that are variously
substituted in nature and are known also as purine bases. They
include adenine and guanine, constituents of nucleic acids, as
well as many alkaloids such as caffeine and theophylline. Uric
acid is the metabolic end product of purine metabolism.

Pyrimidines

Пиримидины

A family of 6-membered heterocyclic compounds occurring in
nature in a wide variety of forms. They include several nucleic
acid constituents (cytosine, thymine, and uracil) and form the
basic structure of the barbiturates.

Quality of Life

Качество жизни (опросник)

A generic concept reflecting concern with the modification
and enhancement of life attributes, e.g., physical, political,
moral and social environment.

Quaternary

1. Четвертичный;
2. Состоящий из четырех
частей

1. Fourth in order. 2. Containing four elements or groups.

Race

Расовая принадлежность

A population within a species which exhibits general
similarities within itself but is both discontinuous and distinct
from other populations of that species, though not sufficiently
so as to achieve the status of a taxon.

Radiation

Радиация, излучение

Emission or propagation of electromagnetic energy
(waves/rays), or the waves/rays themselves; a stream of
electromagnetic particles (electrons, neutrons, protons, alpha
particles) or a mixture of these. The most common source is
the sun.

Radiation therapy

Лучевая/ радиационная
терапия

The use of high-energy radiation from x-rays, gamma rays,
neutrons, and other sources to kill cancer cells and shrink
tumors. Radiation may come from a machine outside the body
(external-beam radiation therapy), or it may come from
radioactive material placed in the body in the area near cancer
cells (internal radiation therapy, implant radiation, or
brachytherapy). Systemic radiation therapy uses a radioactive

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

substance, such as a radiolabeled monoclonal antibody, which
circulates throughout the body. Also called radiotherapy.
Radioactive

Радиоактивный

Giving off radiation.

Radiolabeled

Меченный радиоактивным
изотопом, радиомеченый

Any compound that has been joined with a radioactive
substance.

Radiotherapy

Радиотерапия

The use of ionizing radiation to treat malignant neoplasms
and other benign conditions. The most common forms of
ionizing radiation used as therapy are x-rays, gamma rays, and
electrons. A special form of radiotherapy, targeted
radiotherapy, links a cytotoxic radionuclide to a molecule that
targets the tumor. When this molecule is an antibody or other
immunologic
molecule,
the
technique
is
called
radioimmunotherapy.

Randomized

Рандомизированный

Describes an experiment or clinical trial in which animal or
human subjects are assigned by chance to separate groups that
compare different treatments.

Receptor

Рецептор; рецепторный
датчик

A molecule inside or on the surface of a cell that binds to a
specific substance and causes a specific physiologic effect in
the cell.

Recombinant

Рекомбинантный;
рекомбинант

A cell or an individual with a new combination of genes not
found together in either parent; usually applied to linked
genes.

Recombinant fusion
proteins

Рекомбинантные белки
слияния

Proteins that are the result of genetic engineering. A
regulatory part or promoter of one or more genes is combined
with a structural gene. The fusion protein is formed after
transcription and translation of the fused gene. This type of
fusion protein is used in the study of gene regulation or
structure-activity relationships. They might also be used
clinically as targeted toxins (immunotoxins).

Recombinant proteins

Рекомбинантные белки

Proteins prepared by recombinant DNA technology.

Recombination

Рекомбинация

The formation of new combinations of genes as a result of
segregation in crosses between genetically different parents;
also, the rearrangement of linked genes due to crossing-over.

Rectal

Ректальный

By or having to do with the rectum. The rectum is the last 8 to
10 inches of the large intestine and ends at the anus.

Rectum

Прямая кишка

The last 8 to 10 inches of the large intestine.

Refer

Направить (~в инстанцию)

To send or direct for treatment, aid, information, decision.

Refraction

Рефракция

A test to determine the best eyeglasses or contact lenses to
correct a refractive error (myopia, hyperopia, or astigmatism).

Regimen

Схема приема
(~лекарственного
препарата)

A treatment plan that specifies the dosage, the schedule, and
the duration of treatment.

Replicon

Репликон

In order to be replicated, DNA molecules must contain an
origin of duplication and in bacteria and viruses there is
usually only one per genome. Such molecules are called
replicons.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Respiration

Дыхание

The act of breathing with the lungs, consisting of inspiration,
or the taking into the lungs of the ambient air, and of
expiration, or the expelling of the modified air which contains
more carbon dioxide than the air taken in (Blakiston’s Gould
Medical Dictionary, 4th ed.). This does not include tissue
respiration (= oxygen consumption) or cell respiration (= cell
respiration).

Respiratory distress
syndrome

Респираторный дистресссиндром, синдром
дыхательной
недостаточности

A lung disease that occurs primarily in premature infants; the
new-born must struggle for each breath and bluing of its skin
reflects the baby's inability to get enough oxygen.

Respiratory syncytial
virus

Респираторносинцитиальный вирус

RSV. A virus that causes respiratory infections with cold-like
symptoms.

Retroviral vector

Ретровирусный вектор

RNA from a virus that is used to insert genetic material into
cells.

Reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain
reaction

Полимеразная цепная
реакция с обратной
транскриптазой

A variation of the PCR technique in which cDNA is made from
RNA via reverse transcription. The resultant cDNA is then
amplified using standard PCR protocols.

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Рабдомиосаркома

A malignant tumor of muscle tissue.

Rhinovirus

Риновирус

A genus of Picornaviridae inhabiting primarily the respiratory
tract of mammalian hosts. It includes the human strains
associated with common colds.

Ribonuclease

Рибонуклеаза

RNA-digesting enzyme.

Ribosome

Рибосома

A granule of protein and RNA synthesized in the nucleolus
and found in the cytoplasm of cells. Ribosomes are the main
sites of protein synthesis. Messenger RNA attaches to them
and there receives molecules of transfer RNA bearing amino
acids.

Rigidity

Ригидность

Stiffness or inflexibility, chiefly that which is abnormal or
morbid; rigor.

Risk factor

Фактор риска

A habit, trait, condition, or genetic alteration that increases a
person's chance of developing a disease.

Rotavirus

Ротавирусный; ротавирус

A genus of Reoviridae, causing acute gastroenteritis in birds
and mammals, including humans. Transmission is horizontal
and by environmental contamination.

Ruminants

Мелкий рогатый скот

A suborder of the order Artiodactyla whose members have the
distinguishing feature of a four-chambered stomach. Horns or
antlers are usually present, at least in males.

Saliva

Слюна

The clear, viscous fluid secreted by the salivary glands and
mucous glands of the mouth. It contains mucins, water,
organic salts, and ptylin.

Salivary

Слюнный

The duct that convey saliva to the mouth.

Sclerosis

Склероз

A pathological process consisting of hardening or fibrosis of
an anatomical structure, often a vessel or a nerve.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Screening

Скрининг

Checking for disease when there are no symptoms.

Secretion

1. Секреция; 2. Секрет,
выделение

1. The process of elaborating a specific product as a result of
the activity of a gland; this activity may range from separating
a specific substance of the blood to the elaboration of a new
chemical substance. 2. Any substance produced by secretion.

Secretory

Секреторный

Secreting; relating to or influencing secretion or the
secretions.

Segregation

Сегрегация, разъединение,
расщепление

The separation in meiotic cell division of homologous
chromosome pairs and their contained allelomorphic gene
pairs.

Seizures

Эпилептические припадки

Clinical or subclinical disturbances of cortical function due to
a sudden, abnormal, excessive, and disorganized discharge of
brain cells. Clinical manifestations include abnormal motor,
sensory and psychic phenomena. Recurrent seizures are
usually referred to as epilepsy or “seizure disorder.”

Sensor

Датчик, сенсор

A device designed to respond to physical stimuli such as
temperature, light, magnetism or movement and transmit
resulting impulses for interpretation, recording, movement, or
operating control.

Sequence analysis

Секвенирование, анализ
последовательности

A multistage process that includes the determination of a
sequence (protein, carbohydrate, etc.), its fragmentation and
analysis, and the interpretation of the resulting sequence
information.

Sequence homology

Гомология
последовательностей

The degree of similarity between sequences. Studies of amino
acid and nucleotide sequences provide useful information
about the genetic relatedness of certain species.

Sequencing

Секвенирование

The determination of the order of nucleotides in a DNA or
RNA chain.

Serine

Серин, сер

A non-essential amino acid occurring in natural form as the Lisomer. It is synthesized from glycine or threonine. It is
involved in the biosynthesis of purines, pyrimidines, and other
amino acids.

Seroconversion

Сероконверсия

The change of a serologic test from negative to positive,
indicating the development of antibodies in response to
infection or immunization.

Serologic

Серологический

Analysis of a person's serum, especially specific immune or
lytic serums.

Serum

Сыворотка (крови)

The clear liquid part of the blood that remains after blood cells
and clotting proteins have been removed.

Side effect

Побочный эффект

A consequence other than the one(s) for which an agent or
measure is used, as the adverse effects produced by a drug,
especially on a tissue or organ system other than the one
sought to be benefited by its administration.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Signal transduction

Передача сигнала,
сигнальная трансдукция

The intercellular or intracellular transfer of information
(biological activation/inhibition) through a signal pathway. In
each signal transduction system, an activation/inhibition
signal from a biologically active molecule (hormone,
neurotransmitter) is mediated via the coupling of a
receptor/enzyme to a second messenger system or to an ion
channel. Signal transduction plays an important role in
activating cellular functions, cell differentiation, and cell
proliferation. Examples of signal transduction systems are the
GABA-postsynaptic receptor-calcium ion channel system, the
receptor-mediated T-cell activation pathway, and the
receptor-mediated activation of phospholipases. Those
coupled to membrane depolarization or intracellular release
of calcium include the receptor- mediated activation of
cytotoxic functions in granulocytes and the synaptic
potentiation of protein kinase activation. Some signal
transduction pathways may be part of larger signal
transduction pathways; for example, protein kinase activation
is part of the platelet activation signal pathway.

Small intestine

Тонкая кишка

The part of the digestive tract that is located between the
stomach and the large intestine.

Smallpox

Оспа

A generalized virus infection with a vesicular rash.

Sodium

Натрий

An element that is a member of the alkali group of metals. It
has the atomic symbol Na, atomic number 11, and atomic
weight 23. With a valence of 1, it has a strong affinity for oxygen
and other non-metallic elements. Sodium provides the chief
cation of the extracellular body fluids. Its salts are the most
widely used in medicine. (From Dorland, 27th ed)
Physiologically the sodium ion plays a major role in blood
pressure regulation, maintenance of fluid volume, and
electrolyte balance.

Somatic

1. Соматический;
2. Телесный, физический

1. Pertaining to or characteristic of the soma or body. 2.
Pertaining to the body wall in contrast to the viscera.

Somatic cells

Соматические клетки

All the body cells except the reproductive (germ) cells.

Specialist

Специалист

In medicine, one who concentrates on 1 special branch of
medical science.

Species

Вид (животных)

A taxonomic category subordinate to a genus (or subgenus)
and superior to a subspecies or variety, composed of
individuals possessing common characters distinguishing
them from other categories of individuals of the same
taxonomic level. In taxonomic nomenclature, species are
designated by the genus name followed by a Latin or Latinized
adjective or noun.

Species specificity

Видовая специфика

Restriction of a characteristic or response to the members of
one species; it usually refers to that property of the immune
response which differentiates one species from another on the
basis of antigen recognition, but the concept is not limited to
immunology and is used loosely at levels higher than the
species.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Specificity

Специфичность

Degree of selectivity shown by an antibody with respect to the
number and types of antigens with which the antibody
combines, as well as with respect to the rates and the extents
of these reactions.

Spectrum

Спектр; спектральный

A charted band of wavelengths of electromagnetic vibrations
obtained by refraction and diffraction. By extension, a
measurable range of activity, such as the range of bacteria
affected by an antibiotic (antibacterial s.) or the complete
range of manifestations of a disease.

Sperm

Сперма, сперматозоид

The fecundating fluid of the male.

Spinal cord

Спинной мозг

The main trunk or bundle of nerves running down the spine
through holes in the spinal bone (the vertebrae) from the
brain to the level of the lower back.

Sporadic

Спорадичный

Neither endemic nor epidemic; occurring occasionally in a
random or isolated manner.

Sputum

Мокрота

The material expelled from the respiratory passages by
coughing or clearing the throat.

Steroids

Стероиды

Drugs used to relieve swelling and inflammation.

Stomach

Желудок

An organ of digestion situated in the left upper quadrant of
the abdomen between the termination of the esophagus and
the beginning of the duodenum.

Stomach ulcer

Язвенная болезнь желудка

An open sore in the lining of the stomach. Also called gastric
ulcer.

Stool

Кал

The waste matter discharged in a bowel movement; feces.

Strand

Цепь, нить

DNA normally exists in the bacterial nucleus in a helix, in
which two strands are coiled together.

Streptomycin

Стрептомицин

O-2-Deoxy-2-(methylamino)-alpha-L-glucopyranosyl-(1-2)O-5-deoxy-3-C-formyl-alpha-L-lyxofuranosyl-(1-4)-N,N'-bis(aminoiminomethyl)-D-streptamine. Antibiotic substance
produced by the soil actinomycete Streptomyces griseus. It
acts by inhibiting the initiation and elongation processes
during protein synthesis.

Stress

Стресс

Forcibly exerted influence; pressure. Any condition or
situation that causes strain or tension. Stress may be either
physical or psychologic, or both.

Structure-activity
relationship

Соотношение «структура–
активность»

The relationship between the chemical structure of a
compound and its biological or pharmacological activity.
Compounds are often classed together because they have
structural characteristics in common including shape, size,
stereochemical arrangement, and distribution of functional
groups. Other factors contributing to structure-activity
relationship include chemical reactivity, electronic effects,
resonance, and inductive effects.

Stupor

Ступор

Partial or nearly complete unconsciousness, manifested by the
subject's responding only to vigorous stimulation. Also, in
psychiatry, a disorder marked by reduced responsiveness.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Subacute

Подострый

Somewhat acute; between acute and chronic.

Subclinical

Субклинический,
преклинический;
продромальный,
бессимптомный

Without clinical manifestations; said of the early stage(s) of an
infection or other disease or abnormality before symptoms
and signs become apparent or detectable by clinical
examination or laboratory tests, or of a very mild form of an
infection or other disease or abnormality.

Subspecies

Подвид

A category intermediate in rank between species and variety,
based on a smaller number of correlated characters than are
used to differentiate species and generally conditioned by
geographical and/or ecological occurrence.

Substance P

Субстанция (вещество) Р

An eleven-amino acid neurotransmitter that appears in both
the central and peripheral nervous systems. It is involved in
transmission of pain, causes rapid contractions of the
gastrointestinal smooth muscle, and modulates inflammatory
and immune responses.

Substrate

Субстрат

A substance upon which an enzyme acts.

Substrate specificity

Специфичность субстрата

A characteristic feature of enzyme activity in relation to the
kind of substrate on which the enzyme or catalytic molecule
reacts.

Supportive care

Симптоматическая терапия,
поддерживающая терапия

Treatment given to prevent, control, or relieve complications
and side effects and to improve the comfort and quality of life
of people who have cancer.

Suppression

Подавление, супрессия

A conscious exclusion of disapproved desire contrary with
repression, in which the process of exclusion is not conscious.

Symptomatic

С клинической
симптоматикой,
симптоматический

Having to do with symptoms, which are signs of a condition
or disease.

Synaptic

Синаптический

Pertaining to or affecting a synapse (= site of functional
apposition between neurons, at which an impulse is
transmitted from one neuron to another by electrical or
chemical means); pertaining to synapsis (= pairing off in
point-for-point association of homologous chromosomes
from the male and female pronuclei during the early prophase
of meiosis).

Systemic

Системный

Affecting the entire body.

Tenesmus

Тенезм;

Straining, especially ineffectual and painful straining at stool
or in urination.

Terminator

Стоп-кодон, терминатор,
терминирующий кодон

A DNA sequence sited at the end of a transcriptional unit that
signals the end of transcription.

Therapeutics

Терапевтический;
терапевтического
назначения

The branch of medicine which is concerned with the
treatment of diseases, palliative or curative.

Thermal

Тепловой, термический

Pertaining to or characterized by heat.

Threonine

Треонин, тре

An essential amino acid occurring naturally in the L-form,
which is the active form. It is found in eggs, milk, gelatin, and
other proteins.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Thrombin

Тромбин

An enzyme formed from prothrombin that converts
fibrinogen to fibrin. (Dorland, 27th ed) EC 3.4.21.5.

Thrombomodulin

Тромбомодулин

A cell surface glycoprotein of endothelial cells that binds
thrombin and serves as a cofactor in the activation of protein
C and its regulation of blood coagulation.

Thrombosis

Тромбоз

The formation or presence of a blood clot inside a blood vessel.

Thymus

Тимус

An organ that is part of the lymphatic system, in which T
lymphocytes grow and multiply. The thymus is in the chest
behind the breastbone.

Thyroid

Тироид, щитовидная
железа

A gland located near the windpipe (trachea) that produces
thyroid hormone, which helps regulate growth and
metabolism.

Tinnitus

Шум в ушах

Sounds that are perceived in the absence of any external noise
source which may take the form of buzzing, ringing, clicking,
pulsations, and other noises. Objective tinnitus refers to
noises generated from within the ear or adjacent structures
that can be heard by other individuals. The term subjective
tinnitus is used when the sound is audible only to the affected
individual. Tinnitus may occur as a manifestation of cochlear
diseases; vestibulocochlear nerve diseases; intracranial
hypertension; craniocerebral trauma; and other conditions.

Tissue

Ткань

A group or layer of cells that are alike in type and work
together to perform a specific function.

Tissue culture

Культура ткани

Maintaining or growing of tissue, organ primordia, or the
whole or part of an organ in vitro so as to preserve its
architecture and/or function (Dorland, 28th ed). Tissue
culture includes both organ culture and cell culture.

Titer

Титр

The quantity of a substance required to produce a reaction
with a given volume of another substance, or the amount of
one substance required to correspond with a given amount of
another substance.

Tomography

Томография

Imaging methods that result in sharp images of objects located
on a chosen plane and blurred images located above or below
the plane.

Topical

Локальный, топический,
наружный, для местного
применения

On the surface of the body.

Torovirus

Торовирус

A genus of the family Coronaviridae characterized by
enveloped, peplomer- bearing particles containing an
elongated tubular nucleocapsid with helical symmetry.
Toroviruses have been found in association with enteric
infections in horses (Berne virus), cattle (Breda virus), and
humans. Transmission takes place probably via the fecal-oral
route.

Toxic

Токсичный, токсический

Having to do with poison or something harmful to the body.
Toxic substances usually cause unwanted side effects.

Toxicity

Токсичность

The quality of being poisonous, especially the degree of
virulence of a toxic microbe or of a poison.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Toxicology

Токсикология

The science concerned with the detection, chemical
composition, and pharmacologic action of toxic substances or
poisons and the treatment and prevention of toxic
manifestations.

Toxin

Токсин (яд)

A poison; frequently used to refer specifically to a protein
produced by some higher plants, certain animals, and
pathogenic bacteria, which is highly toxic for other living
organisms. Such substances are differentiated from the simple
chemical poisons and the vegetable alkaloids by their high
molecular weight and antigenicity.

Transcriptase

Транскриптаза

An enzyme which catalyzes the synthesis of a complementary
mRNA molecule from a DNA template in the presence of a
mixture of the four ribonucleotides (ATP, UTP, GTP and CTP).

Transduction

Трансдукция

The transfer of genes from one cell to another by means of a
viral (in the case of bacteria, a bacteriophage) vector or a
vector which is similar to a virus particle (pseudovirion).

Transfection

Трансфекция

The uptake of naked or purified DNA into cells, usually
eukaryotic. It is analogous to bacterial transformation.

Transfer factor

Фактор переноса

Factor derived from leukocyte lysates of immune donors
which can transfer both local and systemic cellular immunity
to nonimmune recipients.

Transferases

Трансферазы

Transferases are enzymes transferring a group, for example,
the methyl group or a glycosyl group, from one compound
(generally regarded as donor) to another compound (generally
regarded as acceptor). The classification is based on the
scheme “donor: acceptor group transferase.” (Enzyme
Nomenclature, 1992) EC 2.

Transfusion

Переливание

The infusion of components of blood or whole blood into the
bloodstream. The blood may be donated from another person,
or it may have been taken from the person earlier and stored
until needed.

Translation

Трансляция

The process whereby the genetic information present in the
linear sequence of ribonucleotides in mRNA is converted into
a corresponding sequence of amino acids in a protein. It
occurs on the ribosome and is unidirectional.

Translational

Трансляционный

The cleavage of signal sequence that directs the passage of the
protein through a cell or organelle membrane.

Transmitter

Медиатор (~реакции)

A chemical substance which effects the passage of nerve
impulses from one cell to the other at the synapse.

Transplantation

Трансплантация

Transference of a tissue or organ, alive or dead, within an
individual, between individuals of the same species, or
between individuals of different species.

Tropism

Тропизм

Directed movements and orientations found in plants, such as
the turning of the sunflower to face the sun.

Trypsin

Трипсин

A serine endopeptidase that is formed from trypsinogen in the
pancreas. It is converted into its active form by

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

enteropeptidase in the small intestine. It catalyzes hydrolysis
of the carboxyl group of either arginine or lysine. EC 3.4.21.4.
Tumor necrosis factor

Фактор некроза опухоли

Serum glycoprotein produced by activated macrophages and
other mammalian mononuclear leukocytes which has
necrotizing activity against tumor cell lines and increases
ability to reject tumor transplants. It mimics the action of
endotoxin but differs from it. It has a molecular weight of less
than 70,000 kDa.

Tunica

Плева, оболочка

A rather vague term to denote the lining coat of hollow organs,
tubes, or cavities.

Tyrosine

Тирозин, тир

A non-essential amino acid. In animals it is synthesized from
phenylalanine. It is also the precursor of epinephrine, thyroid
hormones, and melanin.

Ulcer

Язва

A localized necrotic lesion of the skin or a mucous surface.

Urea

Мочевина

A compound (CO(NH2)2), formed in the liver from ammonia
produced by the deamination of amino acids. It is the principal
end product of protein catabolism and constitutes about one
half of the total urinary solids.

Ureters

Мочеточники

Tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder.

Urethra

Уретра

The tube through which urine leaves the body. It empties
urine from the bladder.

Urinary

Мочевой

Having to do with urine or the organs of the body that produce
and get rid of urine.

Urinary tract

Инфекция мочевыводящих
путей

The organs of the body that produce and discharge urine.
These include the kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra.

Urine

Моча; мочевой

Fluid containing water and waste products. Urine is made by
the kidneys, stored in the bladder, and leaves the body
through the urethra.

Uterus

Матка

The small, hollow, pear-shaped organ in a woman’s pelvis.
This is the organ in which a fetus develops. Also called the
womb.

Vaccination

Иммунизация, вакцинация

Administration of vaccines to stimulate the host's immune
response. This includes any preparation intended for active
immunological prophylaxis.

Vaccine

Вакцина

A substance or group of substances meant to cause the
immune system to respond to a tumor or to microorganisms,
such as bacteria or viruses.

Vaccinia

Осповакцина, вакциния

The cutaneous and occasional systemic reactions associated
with vaccination using smallpox (variola) vaccine.

Vaccinia virus

Вирус осповакцины

The type species of Orthopoxvirus, related to cowpox virus,
but whose true origin is unknown. It has been used as a live
vaccine against smallpox. It is also used as a vector for
inserting foreign DNA into animals. Rabbitpox virus is a
subspecies of vaccinia virus.

Vacuoles

Вакуоли

Any spaces or cavities within a cell. They may function in
digestion, storage, secretion, or excretion.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Variola

Натуральная оспа, вариола

A generalized virus infection with a vesicular rash.

Vascular

Сосудистый

Pertaining to blood vessels or indicative of a copious blood
supply.

Vasodilators

Вазодилататоры

Any nerve or agent which induces dilatation of the blood
vessels.

Vector

Переносчик (возбудителя
инфекции)

Plasmid or other self-replicating DNA molecule that transfers
DNA between cells in nature or in recombinant DNA
technology.

Vein

Вена

Vessel-carrying blood from various parts of the body to the
heart.

Venous

Венозный

Of or pertaining to the veins.

Ventilation

Вентиляция

1. In respiratory physiology, the process of exchange of air
between the lungs and the ambient air. Pulmonary ventilation
(usually measured in liters per minute) refers to the total
exchange, whereas alveolar ventilation refers to the effective
ventilation of the alveoli, in which gas exchange with the
blood takes place. 2. In psychiatry, verbalization of one's
emotional problems.

Ventricles

Желудочки

Fluid-filled cavities in the heart or brain.

Vero cells

Клетки Веро

A cell line derived from the kidney of the African green
(vervet) monkey, Cercopithecus aethiops; used primarily in
virus replication studies and plaque assays.

Vertebrae

Позвоночник

A bony unit of the segmented spinal column.

Vertigo

Вертиго

An illusion of movement; a sensation as if the external world
were revolving around the patient (objective vertigo) or as if
he himself were revolving in space (subjective vertigo). The
term is sometimes erroneously used to mean any form of
dizziness.

Vesicular

1. Пузырьковидный;
2. Везикулярный

1. Composed of or relating to small, saclike bodies. 2.
Pertaining to or made up of vesicles on the skin.

Veterinary medicine

Ветеринария

The medical science concerned with the prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of diseases in animals.

Vial

Флакон

A small bottle.

Villi

Ворсинка

The tiny, finger-like projections on the surface of the small
intestine. Villi help absorb nutrients.

Viremia

Виремия

The presence of virus in blood or blood plasma.

Viral

Вирусный

Pertaining to, caused by, or of the nature of virus.

Viral core proteins

Вирусные ядерные белки

Proteins found mainly in icosahedral DNA and RNA viruses.
They consist of proteins directly associated with the nucleic
acid inside the nucleocapsid.

Viral hepatitis

Вирусный гепатит

Hepatitis caused by a virus. Five different viruses (A, B, C, D,
and E) most commonly cause this form of hepatitis. Other rare
viruses may also cause hepatitis.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

Viral load

Вирусная нагрузка

The quantity of measurable virus in the blood. Change in viral
load, measured in plasma, is used as a surrogate marker in HIV
disease progression.

Viral proteins

Вирусные белки

Proteins found in any species of virus.

Viral regulatory
proteins

Вирусные регуляторные
белки

Proteins which regulate the rate of transcription of viral
structural genes.

Viral structural
proteins

Вирусные структурные
белки

Viral proteins that do not regulate transcription. They are
coded by viral structural genes and include nucleocapsid core
proteins (gag proteins), enzymes (pol proteins), and
membrane components (env proteins). Transcription of viral
structural genes is regulated by viral regulatory proteins.

Virion

Вирион

The infective system of a virus, composed of the viral genome,
a protein core, and a protein coat called a capsid, which may
be naked or enclosed in a lipoprotein envelope called the
peplos.

Virulence

Вирулентность

The degree of pathogenicity within a group or species of
microorganisms or viruses as indicated by case fatality rates
and/or the ability of the organism to invade the tissues of the
host.

Virulent

Вирулентный

A virus or bacteriophage capable only of lytic growth, as
opposed to temperate phages establishing the lysogenic
response.

Virus

Вирус

Submicroscopic organism that causes infectious disease. In
cancer therapy, some viruses may be made into vaccines that
help the body build an immune response to, and kill, tumor
cells.

Virus diseases

Вирусные заболевания

A general term for diseases produced by viruses.

Virus replication

Репликация
(воспроизведение) вируса

The process of intracellular viral multiplication, consisting of
the synthesis of proteins, nucleic acids, and sometimes lipids,
and their assembly into a new infectious particle.

Vitro

Vitro

Descriptive of an event or enzyme reaction under
experimental investigation occurring outside a living
organism. Parts of an organism or microorganism are used
together with artificial substrates and/or conditions.

Vivo

Vivo

Outside of or removed from the body of a living organism.

War

Военный конфликт, война

Hostile conflict between organized groups of people.

White blood cells

Белые кровяные тельца,
лейкоциты

A type of cell in the immune system that helps the body fight
infection and disease. White blood cells include lymphocytes,
granulocytes, macrophages, and others.

Xenograft

Ксенографт

The cells of one species transplanted to another species.

X-ray

Рентген, рентгеновский
снимок

High-energy radiation used in low doses to diagnose diseases
and in high doses to treat cancer.

Created by:
Galina Blankenship
www.transcendwithwords.com

www.transcendwithwords.com

X-ray therapy

Рентгенотерапия, лучевая
терапия

The use of high-energy radiation from x-rays to kill cancer
cells and shrink tumors. Radiation may come from a machine
outside the body (external-beam radiation therapy) or from
materials called radioisotopes. Radioisotopes produce
radiation and can be placed in or near the tumor or in the area
near cancer cells. This type of radiation treatment is called
internal radiation therapy, implant radiation, interstitial
radiation, or brachytherapy. Systemic radiation therapy uses a
radioactive substance, such as a radiolabeled monoclonal
antibody, which circulates throughout the body. X-ray therapy
is also called radiation therapy, radiotherapy, and irradiation.

Yeasts

Дрожжевые грибки,
дрожжи

A general term for single-celled rounded fungi that reproduce
by budding. Brewers' and bakers' yeasts are Saccharomyces
cerevisiae; therapeutic dried yeast is dried yeast.

Zymogen

Зимогенность

Inactive form of an enzyme which can then be converted to
the active form, usually by excision of a polypeptide, e.g.,
trypsinogen is the zymogen of trypsin.

Sources:
1. Coronavirus: A Medical Dictionary, Bibliography, and Annotated Research Guide to Internet References. James N. Parker
and Philip M. Parker, editors, 2004
2. English-Russian Glossary of Key Terms on Vaccinology and Immunization, WHO, 2009
3. Тарантул В.З., Русско-английский Толковый биотехнологический словарь, 2009
4. Вишневец А.В., Соболева В.Ф., Базылев С.Е. и др., Учебно-методическое пособие «Основы генетической
инженерии и биотехнологии», 2010
5. Gufo Medical Dictionary: https://gufo.me/
6. WHO's COVID-19 Technical Guidance Documents (Коронавирусное заболевание (COVID-19) - Технические доклады
и рекомендации): https://www.who.int/ru/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/technical-guidance/naming-thecoronavirus-disease-(covid-2019)-and-the-virus-that-causes-it

См. более 100 справочных материалов, словарей, глоссариев на вебсайте www.transcendwithwords.com.
For 100+ reference materials, dictionaries, glossaries, please visit www.transcendwithwords.com.

